http://home.bip.net/505sweden/sweteam82.htm

Worlds Report - Cork 1982

Seventhy-three 505s from 15 countries took part in one of  the windiest of
recent world championships sailed off Cork harbour. The event was most ably and
amicably hosted by the Royal Cork YC and sponsored by Cleanaway. It was the
third time that the club  had staged the 505 worlds and French veteran Marcel
Buffet had the distinction of being the only competitor to sail in all three
events. He won in Cork way back in 1959 which was his first of two consecutive
worlds championships.

The recent American dominance of 505 racing was maintained by Gary Knapp and
Cam Lewis having a comfortable win from Britons Peter Colclough and Harold
Barnes in second place and fellow Americans Steve Benjamin and Tucker Edmundson
in third. The strong winds and big seas placed a high premium on seamanship and
sound equipment and these factors brought the Scandinavians to the fore with
three Swedish and one Danish boat in the top 10.

Lawrie Smith and Mark Simpson won the pre-worlds series with three wins and
this looked encouraging for British boats. The series was sailed in light to
moderate winds but come the championship proper the weather changed and a
typical forecast was wind west to north-west Force 4 to 5 gusting 6 in the
showers. The first and last races had the lightest winds of Force 3 plus.

Peter Kyne and Robbie Robertson made a good start by leading the first race
only to lose their lead by going too high on the second reach. Knapp and Lewis,
sailing the same boat that Bixby and Lewis won in San Francisco last year, went
straight to take a lead that they never lost in the race.

Perhaps the most remarkable performance  of the race, even the championship,
was that of Sweden's Krister Bergstrom and Per Anders Hallberg who had only 10
boats behind them at the first mark. By sailing the right side of the beat and
getting the shifts right they had only five boats in front at the end of the
second beat. They finished fifth with Howard Hamlin and Jon Andron second,
Benjamin and Edmundson third, Smith and Simpson fourth, Kyne and Robertson
sixth and Colclough and Barnes back in thirteenth place.

For race two the wind went round to the east, blowing a good Force 5 with
enormous rolling seas. It was to provide the most exiting sailing of the week
with fantastic spinnaker reaches with competitors nearly leaving the water
surfing down the waves. Knapp and Lewis's speed to windward was most impressive
and they recorded their second win.

Heavy rain reduced visibility and by the end of the race the wind was up to
Force 6. Denmark's Jorgen Schonherr and Anders Kaempe executed a flawless gybe
at the wing mark and were rewarded with second place ahead of Colclough and
Barnes, Sweden's Karl-Erik Nilsson and Anders Aven and Neal Fowler and Mark
Lindsay (USA) were fifth ahead of Benjamin and Edmundson.

Hamlin and Andron unfortunately capsized and broke their tiller in what was the
first of a number of mishaps that eventually put them completely out of
contention for the title. With the race area at least an hour's sail from the
club and conditions difficult to predict, sail and equipment selection was
difficult for all competitors. This meant that people had to play safe,
particulary as all support boats were banned on the course area; and on a
number of days
