Pacific Coast Championship 1996

John Dean, 505 USA 5518, reported via e-mail on the 1996 505 Pacific Coast
Championship, held at the same time as the 49er "Intergalactic Championship".
John also took great photos of the 505 and 49er action (most photos are of the
505s).

The PCC Regatta is at Cascade Locks Oregon just upriver from the Bonneville
Dam. The regatta is "sharing" the river with the modestly advertised
Inter-Galactic Championships for 49ers. There are ten 5o5s and about fifteen
49ers racing. Ed. Typically, one class would be on the beach while the other
was racing, both to keep them out of each others way, and possibly to ensure
that the 505s did not intrude on the TV footage being shot of the 49ers

The 5o5 teams are Tom Poore / Stewart Park, Howard Hamlin / Mike Martin, Danny
Thompson / Ulli Coblenz, Terry Neff / Bobby Noyes, Jeff Miller / Bruce Heckman,
Craig Perez / Erich Chase, Gary Ruggles / Greg "Moondog" Gump, Jim Wondolleck
/Jay Kuncl, Paul Tara / Todd Koch, and John Dohan / Bill Beardslee. Do not try
to figure out what this listing order signifies, it is just the order in which
the boats are hauled out on the beach... from West to East. I just walked down
the row of boats and asked each person for their name...

There were three races on Friday and also three races today. I did not get here
to see the races on Friday, and also there are no results for 5o5s posted. So I
can only report the finish order for the first three boats in each race for the
six races so far. There will be two more tomorrow (Sunday).

FRIDAY The wind was very strong and gusty. No one had a wind gauge, but they
were estimating over twenty knots. The 49ers suffered badly in these conditions
which were, apparently well beyond their best operating range... lots of broken
equipment and capsized boats. When I first arrived on Saturday, an Australian
49er helm told me his "front end" had spent the night in the local hospital
after getting trapped underwater when the boat turtled and he was held under
with the mainsheet around his neck... apparently stretched tight by the current
acting on the sail. (He is OK now). Another "neutral" party on the beach, who
had seen a lot of turtled 49ers, remarked that they should paint the sail
numbers on the centerboards too...

Race One: First: Howard Hamlin / Mike Martin Second: Jeff Miller / Bruce
Heckman Third: Danny Thompson / Ulli Coblenz Race Two: First: Howard Hamlin /
Mike Martin Second: Jeff Miller / Bruce Heckman Third: Tom Wondolleck / Jay
Kuncl Race Three: First: Howard Hamlin / Mike Martin Second: Jeff Miller /
Bruce Heckman Third: Tom Wondolleck / Jay Kuncl

SATURDAY

The wind was very strong and gusty, from the WSW at over twenty knots with
gusts to thirty, and the river current here runs about six knots East to West.
The weather was sunny with broken clouds, temperature in the seventies, and the
water was surprisingly warm. The course was basically straight down river / up
wind, and then back to the starting line, but you had to pass through two "gate
buoys" on the North side of the course at mid leg. Races were "twice around".

Race Four: First: Howard Hamlin / Mike Martin Second: Tom Wondolleck / Jay
Kuncl Third: Jeff Miller / Bruce Heckman Terry Neff and Bobby Noyes in US 8576
had to withdraw at the first rounding of the weather mark with a torn jib. They
were able to borrow a replacement for the subsequent races (It was a friendly
crowd of 5o5 sailors...).

Race Five: First: Tom Wondolleck / Jay Kuncl Second: Tom Poore / Stewart Park
Third: Jeff Miller / Bruce Heckman

This race was delayed until 3:00 in the afternoon because the wind was too
strong for the 49ers. The 5o5s were first told they were starting after the
49ers, then told to hurry out to start. The 5o5s raced, and then started race
six while the 49ers waited on the beach for the wind to die down. It never did
die down. The commercial interests promoting the 49ers had laid on a helicopter
and chase boats and arranged for ESPN coverage... to be included in a future
special called "Ultimate Sailing". They delayed to try to get suitable
conditions so they could get the most benefit from their investment. When the
wind did not abate, they had three 49ers go out to the (very close by) weather
mark and stage some "mark roundings" for the cameras. Meanwhile the 5o5s raced
on... One sponsor was overheard to be very upset (used unpleasant language) at
the 5o5s, when the second rounding of the weather mark in race five
"interfered" with the 49er-only "photo opportunity" they were staging at the
mark. The 49ers were clearly outside their design envelope in these wind
conditions (but were really fast when upright... alleged by 5o5 guys to be
about half a minute faster on the upwind leg, and a minute faster on the
downwind leg).

Once the race got underway, Jim Wondolleck led until the first rounding of the
weather mark, when Howard Hamlin challenged and took the lead. Tom Poore and
then Jeff Miller were close behind. Everything stayed this way until Howard and
Mike Martin took a brief time out on the last leg for a swim, and finished
fourth.

Race Six: First: Tom Poore / Stewart Park Second: Jeff Miller / Bruce Heckman
Third: Howard Hamlin / Mike Martin

As this race was starting, The 49ers decided to go out and have their long
delayed second race of the day. They started when the 5o5s were almost done
with the first downwind leg. All was marginally well until they rounded the
weather mark and sailed about a quarter mile of their first downwind leg. Then
eight boats of the thirteen 49ers racing capsized. Because of the wind pressure
on their large "wings", a capsized 49er is likely to turn turtle. They all did.
Many of them had broken equipment and / or torn sails and could not have
continued even if they could have been quickly righted. The wreckage was well
in view of all, and the beach was treated to the sight of ten 5o5s sailing
downwind through the wrecked 49er armada.

These results, I have to point out, are based only on crew "debriefings" after
the race. Nothing seems to be posted in the way of standings. I will try to get
official results tomorrow.

John Dean

This report adds some description of events that occurred Sunday (the last day
of the PCC). It is Ali's fault... he wrote me and said he could not find "my
report for Sunday... only the final results". So obviously I left out some
things that were wanted by the "Editor in Chief and Publisher".

There was some real excitement on the course Sunday, even though there were
only two races for 5o5s. The 49ers had two races; the first starting at 9:00
AM. Then the 5o5s had two races, the first starting at 11:00 AM. Everyone was
done and back on the beach by 1:15 PM. The excitement was generated by Tom
Poore and Stewart Park. They led the last two races Saturday for more than half
the race, and then did the same thing Sunday for both races. Race six and seven
they went on to win... never looked back. Race five, the middle race Saturday,
they were leading almost to the end; but capsized, recovered, and finished
second. Race eight was a near duplicate of race five for them. Except they led
from the start to only halfway down the first downwind leg. Then they caught a
bad gust in the middle of a gybe and capsized. But this time the chute became
fouled, badly, in the trapeeze wire and shroud, and the boat turtled and stayed
that way for a long time. The other boats that did not see them go over, were
all wondering "whatever happened to Tom and Stuart?", then they sailed past
them on the next windward leg and wondered if they were all right... they had
been turtled for quite a while. Meanwhile, the "crash boat" had been only
watching over the 49ers and was beached with the crew talking to the 49er
fleet; the 49ers had finished their last race. Earlier, when I was looking for
possible on-water photo opportunities, they offered to take me out but said I
would probably not get near any 5o5s. The quote was "We don't have the gas to
chase the 5o5s; they all pop right back up when they capsize and do not need
us. We are saving the gas to chase the 49ers who actually need us..." Well,
Mrs. Poore was watching the race from shore...we were talking about the race,
how well Tom and Stuart were doing, the capsize, and how long it was taking to
recover. She eventually became mildly worried and went down to the beach and
asked the crash boat to go out and see if they could help. The crash boat
arrived just as Tom and Stuart rescued themselves... I think they may have
ruined the chute... Anyway, they sailed directly for the beach and got a DNF,
and fourth overall for the regatta. But it was a fourth that came very close to
having four wins along the way, and did have two. They were very fast in the
second half of the regatta. Their performance reminds me of an unlimited class,
dirt track motorcycle racer I knew in New Mexico. His name was Leroy Huckabee.
(Honestly, that was really his name.) He always said that if he fell off, he
was going too fast. If he did not fall off, he was not going fast enough. In
between those two conditions, he won races...I think Leroy should have raced
5o5s, or maybe 49ers. He also told me about falling off at 150 m.p.h., he
said,"If you think 150 is fast on a motorcycle, you should try it once without
the motorcycle..." Well, I dared to go ask Stuart about the last race, just
after they came ashore. He was very pleasant about the intrusion, but said
something about needing "to go back to gybing school...".

A follow up on the 49ers: They had two very good and fast races early on
Sunday. The winds were just a little lighter and the skiffs finished up in
style. Also, the Australian crewman who took the dunking was feeling very much
better. On Saturday afternoon he was still feeling pretty wrung out, but Sunday
was OK for him.

There was also some sillyness... The commercial interests used the awards as
another photo-opportunity. We were all arranged for the camera to look like the
biggest crowd possible. A volunteer from the 5o5 fleet was asked for,
specifically one who was not involved in the racing, to present 5o5 awards.
Well, Mike Martin and Paul Tara were both involved in racing and they did not
volunteer. No one volunteered. So the sponsor called the last place finishers
to come up and give the awards to everyone who finished ahead of them... Really
tacky! The "accolades" were also pretty condecending... Don't blame the 49ers
for any of this, they were not amused either.

Then the hype shifted to the 49er results, you can bet the 5o5 results do not
survive the cutting room... They presented West Marine colored jerseys to the
finishers, 5o5 and 49ers both. The colors represented finishing placement. I
remember that blue was for first and red was for second. Well, they had
confused the placement results for second and third, and did not find out until
the jerseys had already been presented. So they took the jerseys back and
re-staged the award of the "correct" colored jerseys. We were prompted to cheer
and applaud again so it could be edited to be right on the video...

Meanwhile, the 5o5 guys were trading jerseys... "What color did you get?" "Oh,
I like green...do you want to trade?" "Red goes better with my boat color (my
eye color?), do you want to swap for this blue one?" And so forth...

So ends the PCC...

John Dean

... and some comments from Mike Martin Anybody who did not go to the PCC,s at
the Columbia River Gorge this past weekend really missed out. It was one of the
best regattas I have ever been to. The breeze averaged about 22 Knots with
steady oscillations, 2 to 3 Knots of upwind current made the beats a bit
quicker than normal and the downwind legs longer than normal. We had super
tight racing with 4 or 5 boats duking it out in the breeze almost every race. I
had never been to the Gorge before but had heard how beautiful it was. I
figured it was just talk. I was wrong. It has some of the most beautiful
scenery that I have ever seen. The facilities were good with beach launching,
and free camping at the site or affordable hotels a three minute walk away.
Everyone who sailed there said that we have to figure out how to have the NA,s
there some day. We are going to try to have the PCCs there again soon.

and some other comments from the event....  The 49ers apparently broke about 5
masts, with at least one simply collapsing as the boat was going upwind.
Apparently, the mast section has been upgraded - though not all the new 49ers
had the new section - to rectify this problem. Several carbon fiber bowsprits
broke, as well as rudder fittings, rudders and centerboards. The 505s had no
breakdowns of consequence, other than Neff/Noyes torn jib. Carl Buchan has
apparently figured out a solution to the 49er spinnaker halyard problem.

Results of Pacific Coast Championships These are final results.

After posting the interim results from Saturday; I was coached on proper form
for reporting results by Mike Martin. These results follow the required
format...

Note that the finishes are as recorded by the Race Committee; which was run by
Werner Ohmes to his usual high standard.  However, the order and points in the
second half of the standings did not seem to add up correctly on the results
sheet posted. So I re-added them, throwing out one finish each. I hope
correctly, at least as to the order... I did not anticipate a discrepancy so I
failed to learn the points assigned for DNS and DNF. Would someone please check
the scores?

I apologize to the afterguard types for the front-end-er bias... Everyone gets
their day.

Two special mentions are required.

Jeff and Bruce were the only ones to finish all eight races without at least
one capsize, and therefore deserve praise for upright conduct...  Bobby and
Terry offered to give me a ride, and Terry took me out for a very fast half
hour on the wire. Very nice guys... and I really enjoyed it. That was my first
experience on a trapeze.


John Dean US5518
