Four 505s raced the Easter regatta run by Maryborough Sailing Club at
Hervey Bay. They were 8638, #42, Connor Eaton and dad Chris Eaton, 8682,
Go to Red, Richard Hyde and son Mathew Hyde, 8781, Two Thirds, Chris
Gregg and dad Ian Gregg, 9074, Earle Grey, Earle Alexander and Chris
Carey.  The locals said that it hardly ever blows from the north and it
never blows from the west at this time of the year so guess what
happened.  There was some fun with our courses overlapping with the
A class catamarans which sail at very different speeds and angles.

Day One, Friday 7 April 2023.

The forecast was for northerly winds starting at 15 knots and dropping
all day. It was from the north but it never died down and we had a great
race with gusts over 20kn!  Ian and Chris were leading when the
spinnaker fell down, nothing broke just the knot came undone. They
tipped the boat over, pulled the halyard down and retied it with the
same knot (slow learners). When it happened again they retied it with
a different knot.  This left Earle and Chris way out in front and the
rest battling for the places which ended up Chris and Ian, Connor and
Chris, Richard and Mathew.

Day Two, Saturday 8 April 2023

The schedule called for a race at 10:30 a break for lunch and race at
14:30 but the combination of a morning high tide and the strong onshore
wind meant that is was difficult to launch the rescue boats so we sailed
two races in the afternoon in a 10-18 kn westerly breeze. With the top
mark close to the shore there were plenty of lulls and shifts to
navigate. First race saw Chris and Ian first, Earle and Chris second,
Connor and Chris third and Richard and Mathew fourth.  The second race
was going to a similar plan until Chris Carey fell over and then knocked
Earle off the boat while they were in second place and they took some
time to sort out the spinnaker and retired from that race.

Day Three, Sunday 9 April 2023

This went according to schedule with a race in the morning and a race in
the afternoon. The breeze was 5 to 12 kn from the north west, again with
some definite patches to it. Mathew Hyde had not been on a dinghy for
many years and he and Richard improved with every race. With practice
and moderate conditions all four boats finished within 70 seconds after
56 minutes in the final race. Warm water, sunshine, good racing was the
summary of the weekend. The comeback of the weekend was probably Connor
and Chris getting into a line of pressure close to the beach with the
spinnaker up and making huge gains on the others.

https://www.facebook.com/ian.gregg.aus/posts/pfbid026UTbVdoFZkMqQs3mPX3QihNTZ9qaYzvhxEvw7RW9shSjixWs6D79t5CMDxGZgUWl

Ian Gregg
