The Pacific Northwest 505 region just finished an epic weekend of
sailing at the Columbia River One-Design regatta hosted by the Columbia
Gorge Racing Association in Cascade Locks, OR.  The regatta was held
from 26-28 July. Six teams made the trip from Washington, Canada,
California, and one local sailor! Numbers were likely more limited this
year as teams begin traveling to Europe in preparation for 505 Worlds in
Sweden.

Friday:

After a short postponement on shore, the breeze started out light at
around 10 kts at the start of racing. Racing was extremely tight as the
fleet compressed downwind as the fleet headed into the current. The
racing started out as a sit run but quickly transitioned to wire running
by the end of the first downwind as the breeze increased. The wind was
puffy, with large velocity differences across the course. Elsa and
Blaine got off to a great start with a race that they controlled from
start to finish in the variable conditions described above. By the time
the second race started, the breeze had filled in and was gusting into
the high teens and low twenties. Rich and I found our stride and were
able to piece things together for the next two races of the day.  Miles
and Lily started their impressive string of consistency and methodically
scored seconds throughout the first two days. Special recognition to
Lily Grimshaw is required who did amazing in her first ever 505 regatta!
The Gorge conditions are always challenging, and she managed it like
a seasoned pro.

After racing Aaron hosted the entire fleet at his house in Hood River
where the whole group enjoyed grilled food and refreshments. It is
always super fun to get all the 505 racers together and demonstrates the
camaraderie that we all have on and off the water. I could not think of
a better group of people to hang out with!

Saturday:

Saturday had more typical Gorge conditions, wind in the low 20s with
higher gusts and a strong current flowing upwind. The fleet completed
three races where the fleet slowly thinned due to breakdown and
capsizes. Elsa and Blaine were quick throughout the day, but suffered an
unfortunate breakdown in the first race when they broke one of their
spinnaker poles. They did a great job sailing back in quickly, replacing
the broken pole, and coming out to win the last race.  Ian and Declan
Oâ€™Leary did an impressive job with some consistent sailing to get third
in the first race of the day. Capitalizing on the mistakes of other
teams was clearly the name of the game.  Post racing, most of the teams
were camping at the marina and enjoyed a fun night in camp.

Sunday:

On the last day of racing, the fleet complete one race in extremely
challenging conditions. The wind was steady around 25 kts and gusts were
certainly higher than that at times. Blaine and Elsa again showed their
speed, but this race was one of survival. By my count, every team
capsized at least once. Ryan and Patrick were able to gain positions on
the last run by keeping their mast dry. After the race, most teams made
the decision to sail in given the intensity of the conditions. Rich and
I even broke our rudder hardware while deciding what we were going to
do. This led to some eventful moments as we got our sails down and got
a line to a crash boat for the long tow in.

As always, I want to thank the staff and volunteers at CGRA for hosting
a wonderful event. The Columbia River Gorge is also a truly fantastic
place to sail. If you have never made the trip, please consider making
the journey next year. It is simply epic racing in an epic location.

-Clark Hayes
