Jim Englert/Thad Melton DOMINATE WRSC 505 Regional, May 24,25


Jim Englert/Thad Melton led at every mark to win the first three races of the
West River Sailing Club 505 Regional, May 24-25. Behind them the rest of the
fleet fought hard for the remaining positions, but no one could touch
Englert/Melton in their new Waterat.

Saturday saw 10-12 knots of wind from 150 degrees, rather than the typical 180
degree Chesapeake sea breeze. A strong tide was running against the wind,
creating some interesting chop in the shallow water of the race course. Though
pressed around the race course, Englert/Melton were never headed. Ali
Meller/Allan Johnson were 2nd to Englert/Melton in the 1st race. Macy
Nelson/Mike Mills were 3rd, brothers Henry and Doug Amthor (Chesapeake Bay Star
Wars and Bermuda Race Week winners) were 4th, and Jonathan Phillips/Monty
Schumpert, racing Jonathan's finally repainted and re-rigged Waterat, 7879,
5th. Englert/Melton led the second race wire to wire. Meller/Johnson were close
behind at the gybe and first leeward marks, but fell to 2nd last when they
swamped the boat while they tried a unique gybe twice while dousing and sailing
by the lee maneuver, a boatlength from the leeward mark, trying to hold off a
fast closing Tim Collins (past 470 North American Champion) and Bill Smith
(Vanguard 15 class president). Collins/Smith were 2nd, (after a DNS in the
first race), Phillips/Schumpert 3rd, Nelson/Mills 4th, Amthor/Amthor 5th, and
Hampton One Design CBYRA High Point champion, and Latane Montague/Robert
Montague 6th.

Englert/Melton won race 3, with Amthor/Amthor pulling through into 2nd,
Collins/Smith 3rd, Nelson/Mills 4th, Phillips/Schumpert 5th and Meller/Johnson
6th. Conditions were shifty and puffy for all three races, with lots of chop
upwind, and downwind legs lengthened considerably by the tide; places changed
around the race course, including the run to the finish (races 1 and 2 were
finished downwind, race 3 had one more windward leg to make an old Olympic
course.

The fleet adjourned to WRSC for an extended social event, followed by some pub
crawling in old town Alexandria.

The forecast Sunday was for a chance of thunderstorms. After persuading the
race committee that the 505s would rather face thunderstorms in the deeper
water of the Bay rather than the shallow water - and shifty winds - of the West
River, the fleet sailed out for races 4 and 5. The breeze was again from 150
degrees for race 4. Phillips/Schumpert led at the windward mark, with
Nelson/Mills and Englert/Melton in pursuit. Nelson/Mills got by
Phillips/Schumpert near the bottom of the first reach. The current took many
teams high of the gybe mark, and in the struggle to get down to the mark,
Meller/Johnson, Amthor/Amthor and Collins/Smith were able to close on the
leaders.. Most of the fleet actually got to the gybe mark at the same time....
Collins/Smith tried to gybe early and cut inside, but Englert/Melton shut the
door on them, so they went on the wrong side of the mark AND hit it.
Meller/Johnson, even further outside, tried the same maneuver and pulled it
off, rounding astern of Collins/Smith and found themselves high of the pack
when Collins/Smith doused and returned to round the mark properly.
Amthor/Amthor rolled Englert/Melton and tried to take Meller/Johnson up, but
were rolled in turn. Halfway down the leg Meller/Johnson rolled
Phillips/Schumpert and then managed to hold them and Amthor/Amthor off as the
pack pumped their way down to the mark. Nelson/Mills led up the 2nd beat, with
Meller/Johnson 2nd and Phillips/Schumpert 3rd.

Nelson/Mills covered Meller/Johnson out to the left side of the beat, looking
for more current and breeze. While those teams closed, Phillips/Johnson went
hard right towards the shore, found the shift they needed, and led at the
weather mark again, with Nelson/Mills 2nd, Meller/Johnson 3rd, Amthor/Amthor
4th and Englert/Melton 5th. All teams chose to do bear away sets for the run to
the finish, except Englert/Melton who gybe set and headed towards shore. First
Meller/Johnson, and then Nelson/Fry gybed to port, leaving Phillips/Schumpert
and Amthor/Amthor heading for the outside corner, and Englert/Melton heading
for the inside. When Englert/Melton gybed back to port, it appeared that they
had everyone, but Meller/Johnson were able to gybe close enough to them to hold
on. On the outside corner, Amthor/Amthor pulled past Phillips/Schumpert, and
then as the 5 teams converged on the finish, Amthor/Amthor were leading, a
couple of boatlengths in front of Phillips/Schumpert... Nelson/Mills luffed
behind Meller/Johnson, as the latter bore off to clear the RC boat end of the
line, establishing an overlap at about one boatlength and calling for room.
This was disputed by Meller/Johnson, who crossed with less than a half a
boatlength lead. Discussions regarding room at the finish line under the new
rules were continued on shore after racing. Englert/Melton, who rounded 5th,
led down the run at one point.. ended up 5th, a boatlength behind Nelson/Mills.

Just as this pack finished, the wind increased and clocked past 180.. The RC
reset the course once the new wind had "stabilized" at 220, with 10-15 knots
off the shore and big puffs. Being the last race, this was the old Olympic
course. Off the start line, Englert/Melton (leeward), Nelson/Mills and
Meller/Johnson (windward) emerged, with the rest of the fleet eventually being
forced to tack for clear air and head inshore. The three leaders drag raced to
the left corner, expecting to get more pressure away from the shore. After
unsuccessfully trying to get Meller/Johnson to tack, Nelson/Mills tacked, and
both Englert/Melton and Meller/Johnson followed suit. A lift put all three
teams on the port layline, well ahead of the others. Englert/Melton were able
to foot down over Nelson/Mills, who were being squeezed up by Meller/Johnson.
Englert/Melton were then able to foot over Meller/Johnson as well, to hold a
narrow lead at the windward mark, with Meller/Johnson 2nd and Nelson/Fry 3rd.
Meller/Johnson rolled Englert/Melton part way down the first reach, and managed
to unhook their spinnaker sheet from over the boom at the gybe mark just in
time to prevent Englert/Melton from rolling them in turn. Positions held up the
beat, and then puffs and shifts down the run rescrambled the fleet, with
Englert/Melton almost getting inside Meller/Johnson at the leeward mark, and
Collins/Smith, Amthor/Amthor and Phillips/Schumpert passing Nelson/Mills.
Meller/Johnson covered Englert/Melton closely to the finish, with Collins/Smith
finishing 3rd, Phillips/Schumpert 4th, Nelson/Mills powering through
Amthor/Amthor upwind for 5th, and Amthor/Amthor 6th.

With the exception of Englert/Melton, who counted 3 1sts and a 2nd, and dropped
a 5th, the final scores were very close. Meller/Johnson won the 12 point tie
breaker over Amthor/Amthor to take 2nd, with Amthors 3rd. Tim Collins/Bill
Smith won the 14 point tie breaker over Phillips/Schumpert to take 4th, with
Phillips/Schumpert 5th. Nelson/Mills were 1 point further back in 6th. Yes
folks, that's 3 points difference between 2nd and 6th! Latane Montague/Robert
Montague were 7th, just two points ahead of Mark Freedman/Phillipe Goubalt in
8th.

A very interesting event. Jim Englert/Thad Melton, the lightest team in the
regatta, were the fastest upwind in breeze, and handled the chop on Saturday
very well too. Meller/Johnson managed to salvage 2nd overall after a
disasterous Saturday, by finishing 3,1 in the Sunday races. Tim Collins/Bill
Smith have completely rerigged Rondar 8060. Almost every piece of wire running
rigging has been replaced with spectra or vectran, including a vectran
forestay; the boat looked great, and was going through the water very well too.
A number of teams had Spiro pole launchers. Latane Montague, sailing with his
cousin, was still figuring out his oak tanked Waterat (ex Englert/Melton, ex
Nelson), but showed signs of developing some speed. Meller/Johnson (Saturday)
and Nelson/Mills (Sunday) were experimenting with a new North mainsail, while
Englert/Melton, Collins/Smith and Amthor/Amthor used Ullman/Danger mains.
Jonathan Phillips' Waterat 7879 is now over ten years old. It was carefully
sanded prior to painting, so may not have gained any weight. Apart from a
little wear on the wooden centerboard case and aft thwart it looked like it
came out of the mould yesterday. It seems as stiff as a new boat. If a boat
looks like new, is down to weight, has not softened, and is well rigged, is it
the same as a new boat? The boat was originally red with the standard issue
Waterat navy grey tanks and foredeck but now has a white hull (lightest) color,
with light grey tanks.

Thanks to Bob and Glenda Bolmquist, Bill Beaver and several other members of
the WRSC International Canoe fleet for doing an excellent job as Race
Committee.


-----------


505 Mid Atlantic Championship Regatta
West River Sailing Club
September 13-14
Updated 9:18 AM on 9/17/97

A surprisingly large fleet - considering that the pre-pre-worlds would be the
following weekend in New England, and the container from the Denmark Worlds had
not yet returned - arrived at 5o5 Fleet 19's home, the West River Sailing Club,
for the 1997 Mid-Atlantics. Apart from a strong local contingent, teams from
Hampton Virginia, and our new Sandy Hook, New Jersey fleet participated.

The absence of the Worlds boats and the upcoming pre-pre-worlds also led to
some interesting pick up teams. Macy Nelson was brought in to drive Monty
Schumpert's boat, with Monty on the wire. Macy looked strangely at home in
8015, except for the jib tack being on the bow.... 8015 is identical in color
scheme to Macy's 8191, and in fact was Macy's boat prior to being sold to
Monty. Lauren Abramson and Tom O'Toole finally finished refinishing the seat
tanks on the Lindsay 505 they bought late last year. This was their second
regatta of the season, as the boat had not been in the water since the January
Midwinters in Florida. The boat is GORGEOUS! All the paint on the tanks was
removed, the tanks sanded down to fresh mahogany, and clear finished with epoxy
and a poly coat on top. The tanks look like NEW! What with his crew - and Fleet
19s fleet captain - having departed for Seattle, Ali Meller needed a
replacement. Fortunately one of Allan Johnson's last actions before getting on
the plane, was lining up Aussie expatriate Dave Stewart, a past 505, Aussie 16
foot skiff and UK 18 foot skiff sailor, to crew for Ali. Jonathan Phillips
recruited occasional crew Les Crane for the event, while Tom Price brought in
Chris Ryan - last seen in a 505 as a member of 505 Team New Zealand - to crew.
John Wyles hooked up with Allan Freedman, while Peter Mignerey recruited Josh
Sharp for his 505 debut. Steven Brown brought in Alex Turchi for his first 505
regatta.

The fleet included two female 505 sailors (Lauren Abramson and Betsy O'Brien),
two family teams; one married couple (the O'Briens) and one son-and-father team
(the Bretons); Dylon Breton is 16, but has been helming 505s at the national
and international level since he was 12. Ten of the 26 sailors at the event
were new to the 505 class in North America in the past year. Welcome to: Dave
Stewart, Lauren Abramson, Tom O'Toole, Tom Price, Allan Freedman, Josh Sharp,
Steven Brown, Alex Turchi, Fred Liesegang, and Dave Anderson.

Unfortunately, the weather was not very cooperative, and the RC and the 505
fleet got in three painfully light air races rather than the planned 6. In the
first race, Hampton Yacht Club 505 aces Jim Englert/Thad Melton won a first
beat long duel on the left side of the beat over Ali Meller/Dave Stewart to
lead at the weather mark, with Meller/Stewart and Jonathan Phillips/Les Crane
in pursuit. Englert/Melton opened up on the bottom of 2nd reach, while 2nd
opened up on 3rd as the wind went very light. Dave Stewart found a puff to the
right that put Meller/Stewart ahead at the next cross near the weather mark.
Meller/Stewart were able to put enough distance between themselves and
Englert/Melton to hold them off down the run. With the wind going lighter all
the time, the fleet was quite spread out at the downwind finish.

An attempt was made to start a second race in the West River, but this was
abandoned after a 50 degree right shift in a puff failed to hold, and the wind
died once again. The 505ers gladly sailed in for some cold beer, and an
informal 505 tuning and local conditions seminar.

Sunday morning looked no more promising than Saturday, but a race was started
in light air that promptly went lighter. Lauren Abramson/Tom O'Toole
demonstrated that they had taken the tuning session to heart, as they powered
off the start line with excellent speed, were on the correct side of the back,
and led at the weather mark. In almost no breeze and a building current, they
held that position down the reach, and stayed ahead when the second reach
turned into a beat. The race was shortened at the end of the second "reach"
giving Abramson/O'Toole the winning gun. Englert/Melton were 2nd,
Nelson/Schumpert 3rd, while Meller/Stewart found a couple of puffs to pass four
boats on the last beat to finish 4th, just inches ahead of Dylan Breton/Mike
Breton and Jonathan Phillips/Les Crane.

The wind appeared to have filled in - at least to the 2-3 knot level - so the
RC reset the course and started another race. Sure enough, what breeze was
present was dying before the starting signal. In an increasing flood tide, the
fleet struggled up to the windward mark, with the Breton's rounding first,
Englert/Melton 2nd, and Stewart/Meller (who had swapped positions) tacking
inside Abramson/O'Toole at the weather mark to round 3rd. Abramson/O'Toole
worked low on the reach to be inside of Stewart/Meller at the gybe, but
Stewart/Meller were able to gybe early and sail over Abramson/O'Toole as they
completed their gybe. Sailing high and keeping speed (a relative concept on
this day) up, Stewart/Meller were able to go over Englert/Melton and pull into
2nd. A difficult leeward mark rounding by the Bretons put Stewart/Meller into a
potential regatta winning lead, but they were unable to hold off the Bretons
and Englert/Melton up the LOONG port tack beat against the current. A final
back lifted the Bretons into first and Englert/Melton into 2nd at the windward
mark. The Bretons chose to bear away set, while both Englert/Melton and
Stewart/Meller gybe set. The breeze veered forcing all three teams to douse
their spinnakers, and it also put Breton's ahead and to leeward, though below -
and down current - from the rhumb line to the finish. As the wind backed again,
all three teams re-hoisted. Stewart/Meller had sailed the highest and were able
to hoist earliest, but the added speed was not enough to make up for the
increased distance they sailed; they were unable to gain on Englert/Melton.
Though well below the rhumb line, the Breton's were able to reach high with
speed, and finished ahead of Stewart/Meller though behind Englert/Melton.

This gave the abridged 3 race series to Englert/Melton, with Stewart/Meller
2nd, Nelson/Schumpert 3rd, the Bretons 4th, newcomers Abramson/O'Toole 5th
(despite not making the first race start), Phillips/Crane 6th, Albacore star
Barney Harris/Jesse Falsone 7th, newcomer Tom Price/Chris Ryan 8th (despite not
racing in the Saturday race), John Wyles/Allan Freedman 9th, the O'Briens 10th,
Peter Mignerey/Josh Sharp 11th (despite missing Saturday's race), Steven
Brown/Alex Turchi 12th, and Fred Liesegang/Dave Anderson, in their amazing 23
year old Parker 505 4936, 13th.

Thanks to the primarily International Canoe Race Committee for running three
races in very trying (for both RC and competitors) conditions.
