https://www.facebook.com/Australian505SailingAssociation/posts/pfbid0TLXbWwP3duKd6p9UcLPWhnxAAs9BLcZBXXwf5wh3WX9chpq89rayZzjFvGzWormCl

Four 505s turned up for the Easter regatta at Hervey Bay about 4 hours
drive north from Brisbane on 29-31 March 2024.

Just the usual, warm air, warm water, nice breeze, nice sandy beach,
great competition. 5 races were held over 3 days.

The teams were John Black and Daniel Ware in 8738 A Salt Weapon Chris
Gregg and Ian Gregg (dense505crew) in 8781 Captain Crispy Peter Croft
and Lindsay Gilbert in 9071 Sweaty Betty (sail number 9073) Earle
Alexander (80 years old) and Josh Mortensen (local sailmaker and super
crew) in 9074 Earle Grey

Race one on Friday afternoon saw Earle and Josh close behind Chris and
Ian until they stopped to try to catch some prawns with the spinnaker.
This left Chris and Ian with an easy win but the big news was John and
Daniel finishing second in front of two more experienced teams.

Race two on Saturday morning started close between Earle/Josh and
Chris/Ian until the main halyard broke on 8781 and Chris and Ian tipped
the boat, lashed the main up and continued to finish second but a long
way behind Earle and Josh.

Chris and Ian missed race three as the broken halyard had tangled inside
the mast and took ages to sort out.  Only Earle/Josh and Peter/Linday
finished that race.

Race four on Sunday morning was a sailing lesson from Earle and Josh who
managed to consistently find the right way through the light, shifty
conditions to win by a large margin.  Ian and Chris did the opposite and
found all the lulls to finish third behind Peter and Lindsay.

The breeze increased for race five on Sunday afternoon and it was very
close until Chris and Ian got a bit of gap on the last lap of three to
take the win but the regatta was won by Earle and Josh with a race to
spare.

