Mike Holt
3 Aug 2021, 20:13
505-usa-west-coast@googlegroups.com, 505-north-america@googlegroups.com

After a year off for some reason or the other the 2021 PCC’s took place in the
fantastic setting of Cascade Locks on the Columbia River Gorge. Well known as
potentially a high wind venue, in reality, the conditions can be quite
variable, and this proved to be the case with the wind between 5 and 15 knots
for the most part.

Several teams got to the venue several days earlier and enjoyed near perfect
conditions, not too little, not too much and warm and sunny. With good debriefs
and a many small but important gains being made and rusty boat handling sorted
out.

The event was held alongside the CGOD event and was sailed over two days rather
than the normal three we have for the PCC’s. Sadly only 10 boats made it, where
were the rest of you??? But it was a highly competitive 10 boats, including
teams made up from 4 of the top 5 at the now distant previous Worlds. But these
teams did not have it all their own way with all the other teams getting well
amongst it all the time.

Saturday dawned with no wind, high cloud and rain in the vicinity, really
tamping down the breeze. After a postponement racing got under way in 5-7 knots
from the West. Not classic Gorge! For those that have not been, the race track
is on a river. Fairly wide and with a current running at 1-2 knots. Making for
shorter beats and longer downwind. Great when the breeze is up, but very
testing in the lighter pressure. We managed to get 2 races in and it was really
important to find and stay in pressure. Places changes were frequent and
nothing was certain until you were finished. When the dust settled, Rob and I
managed to pull off wins in both racing, with Adam and Mike finishing 2nd in
both. Don Smith sailing with a class returnee, Mike Punnett pulled off a 3rd in
race one and PVG and Doug 3rd in the second. They were the results, but it
really doesn’t say how close it was all through the fleet and one mistake or
bit of luck moved you from front to back or the reverse!

Sunday was looking much better for the breeze and I think we all thought we
were in for a classic Gorge day. We left the beach and wire ran down to the
start, but the breeze had other ideas, pulsing in and out. Fortunately, it
slowly built during the day enabling 5 fantastic races to be held. I really
can’t remember an event with so many place changes and passing lanes. You could
never give up, or let off. My memory of each individual race it somewhat
blurry, so apologies for any mistakes. Adam and Mike pulled off a race win in
the first race of the day, passing Reeve and Howie late in the race. Eric and
Nic started the day better with a 3rd, putting a shocker of a Saturday behind
them. They then followed up that with a race win from Adam/Mike. Somehow Rob
and I went from last at the last top mark to a third, really unfair for Paul
and Miles, who had pushed hard for a podium finish, making it tight at the top.
The next two races were real battles. The result in the balance until the end.
Rob and I put our week of practice to good use, along with our cheap sunglasses
to find better pressure on the South bank to win both, Eric and Nic recorded
two 2nds, Adam and Mike 2 thirds.

Going into the last race, Rob and I had a 3 point buffer on Adam/Mike, we
didn’t know it at the time, who can keep track, but that gave us the trophy
with a race to spare. In our heads, we had to get a third to win, Adam and Mike
thought they needed a boat between us. This made the last race interesting. The
breeze was now the best of the weekend, we were raked to 4. We came off the
start, with 9106 under us, the wind flicking around. Mike tacks,
thinking/hoping to cross us, fails, tacks and a short tacking duel ensues.
Regardless, we both still go around in the top 3. Adam and Mike move into the
lead, we drop to 4th by the next windward mark, long downwind and short beat to
the finish… Reeve and Howie push the shore too close, pick up weed and flip, up
to 3rd, looking good. We play the south bank again and pick up Eric and Reeve,
round the leeward mark in 2nd. Adam and Mike thinking they need to sail us
back, lay in wait. A great battle to the finish, but no place changes.

A great weekend with the scores not really showing how close it was, with Mike
and Ryan finishing 10th, despite being ahead of us multiple times over the
weekend! As they say, only one place it counts though. Great racing, great
times, if you were not there you missed a great weekend, superbly hosted and
run by the Columbia Gorge Racing Association and  our PRO Kerry Poe, huge
thanks to them.

