https://usa505.org/santa-cruz-summer-505-regatta-a-whale-of-a-good-time/

Santa Cruz Summer 505 Regatta – A Whale of a Good Time!

Report by Eric Anderson

Thirteen teams gathered at the Santa Cruz Yacht Club this weekend for the Santa
Cruz 5o5 Regatta.  On Saturday we had 10 to 18 knots of NW breeze and beautiful
rolling waves. The standard “go right” logic didn’t apply and it was more a
game of picking long port legs back from the middle left, which had the best
pressure.  Mike/Adam apparently felt quite confident going into the regatta,
electing to forgo not only the two days of tuning the fleet did on Thurs/Fri
but also an on-time start to Race 1, arriving three minutes late after Adam
accidently woke up in Michigan that morning and giving newcomer Nic Baird(/Eric
Anderson) the first bullet of the day.  Having had enough of that, Mike/Adam
promptly swept the next three races.  Mike H/Rob W were eager to share their
local knowledge with the fleet but failed to point out all the whales and tore
their transom off midway through the day.  Reeve very generously offered Holtie
the black boat for Sunday, nicely sidestepping Holtie’s intention to turn the
Saturday night barbeque into an all night rigging party for 6992 (the new fleet
boat, now sitting in his driveway).

On Sunday a weak westerly was pulsing onto/off of the course, resulting in huge
holes and a “must go left” paradigm.  Starting well near the pin was critical,
and the teams that held lanes off the line going left won most of the races.
Nic/Eric disastrously fell from their 1st place position going into the day
after two bad starts and an ill timed jibe to course right resulted in three
shockers, while Howie/Jeff tore up the leaderboard (Howie’s secret: line up
parallel to Mike/Adam and then turn 5 degrees higher).  Training partners
Kevin/guest star Paul Allen also registered major gains with a 2 in R5 and the
bullet in R6.  When the dust settled Howie/Jeff came out on top, followed by
Mike/Adam and Kevin/Paul.

Our next event is CGOD in the Gorge at the end of July.  Come Early! There will
be a tuning group all week!

