Short Course Championship
Stone SC, 12/13 June 1999
Report: Mike Holt

Over the weekend of 12th & 13th of June the 505 fleet journeyed to Stone
SC in Essex for their open meeting and 505 short course championship.
Six races were sailed with winds on Saturday generally around 10 14
knots with heavy rain showers. Come Sunday the wind was lighter and the
sun was attempting to break through.

The event was the last chance for British crews to race in the UK before
going to France for the World Championships in two weeks time so it was
a competitive fleet of 30 boats that took to the water. As is the norm
when racing at Stone, place changes were many and mastering the tide was
crucial. By the end of racing on Saturday Clive Robinson and Gary
Cawthorn were leading with 1,1,6 from Mike Holt and Paul Beasley with
1,4,3, with Martin Hodgson and Alistair Macleod further back in 3rd.
Saturday evening was party time with bar profits high and Sunday seeing
a few sore heads.

Clive and Gary carried on as they had left off winning race 4 but
slipped badly in race 5 which was won by light wind specialists Terry
Scutcher and Simon Lake winning from the lightweight Adrian Miles and
Laurence Crispin team. So going into the last race Robinson and Cawthorn
had a slim 1 point lead over Holt and Beasley with a large gap to the
large chasing pack. After a lap, Holt led with Robinson back in 5th but
a bad last run from Holt saw them slip to 3rd with Robinson climbing to
4th. A last gasp luff from Holt was enough to put 2 boats back between
them giving the meeting to Holt and Beasley. Superb work from the race
committee and there team of helpers enabled a very good weekend of
racing to take place in what were far from easy conditions for them. So
now to the Worlds………………
