SSA Spring Bowl

April 15th, Eastport Maryland -- The first local 505 regatta of the season was
this past Saturday, April 15th, (on day only) at Severn Sailing Association
(SSA). At the suggestion of several fleet members, we scheduled some one day
events this season, so we could race 505s one day and still have a weekend day
to do something else.  Saturday morning was misty, and raining, with very
little wind apparent. Despite several last minute no shows, 6 teams were at SSA
ready to go racing (a number which would have given us the largest fleet in the
event), and were waiting through a postponement on shore. Just as the prospect
of racing started to brighten, the two visiting WRSC teams (apparently
fair-weather-only sailors), decided to trail down to WRSC rather than rig and
race the event. One suggested that if it blew 15+ knots, they'd sail back to
the race course (we never saw them again). The remaining four teams launched
and sailed out to the nearby race course. The Solings and Viper 640s wanted
windward-leeward courses, while the 505s wanted something with reaches, so we
were started third with a gold cup course. The right (towards the spider buoy)
seemed to have a little more pressure, while the reach mark to the left seemed
to be in a lighter zone (shielded by Greenbury Point).

After some jockying for the start, Laser racer Mike Albert, trying out 505s for
the first time, and veteran crew Les Crane won the committee boat end, just far
enough to windward of Ali Meller and Jet 14-sailor-trying-out-505s, Randy
Bruns, to keep their air clear, with Steve Lieberman/Josh Lieberman a little
further down the line, and John Hauser with newcomer to 505s, Aleksandar "Suki"
Sukiban in the clear, further down the line.

The Liebermans quickly tacked to port going for the pressure on the right, but
Hauser/Suki were going fast to leeward and Albert/Crane kept Meller/Bruns
pinned on starboard. Hauser/Suki were going very high, while Meller/Bruns were
going a little faster, but not as high. After a couple of interesting minutes
of upwind sailing, Hauser/Suki tacked to port, followed closely by Meller/Bruns
who tacked four boatlengths to weather of them and abeam. Both teams crossed
Albert/Crane, who had decided they wanted to work the left a little more.

The pressure line was finicky, and though the Liebermans had tacked first, they
did not get into the pressure ahead of Hauser/Suki and Meller/Bruns, and when
the Liebermans did hit the pressure line, they also had a noticeable knock,
which immediately put them above the starboard tack layline for the mark.
Meanwhile, Albert/Crane were working some port tack lifts on the other side of
the beat, and were looking good despite the apparently lower pressure on the
left.

Meller/Bruns controlled Hauser/Suki to the starboard tack layline, and then
tacked away for the mark. Though it looked close crossing Albert/Crane for
awhile, Meller/Bruns soon looked good to cross and then Albert/Crane tacked to
leeward, well short of the layline. The right finally started to pay, and
Hauser/Suki and the Liebermans closed on Meller/Bruns, while Albert/Crane, who
had looked very good at times, fell to fourth by the windward mark. Down the
light air reach, Meller/Bruns struggled to get down to the mark with the small
kite they were carrying, and ended up sailing well high of the mark and gybing
quite early. However, the other 505 teams chose to sail a similar course. The
second reach was quite tight due to a little current (flooding), and
Meller/Bruns were able to open up on Hauser/Suki (who doused their kite).
Meanwhile the Liebermans, also using a small kite, had lost Albert/Crane, who
were using a medium.

By the leeward mark, Meller/Bruns had almost overhauled the last (of the three)
Viper 640s, which had started 5 minutes earlier than the 505s. Each team
rounded up to close hauled on port at the leeward mark and chose to keep going,
presumably as each wanted to go right for more breeze. Meller/Bruns had to sail
through the lee of the Viper and into clear air ahead and to leeward, before
pointing up and putting the Viper dead astern. The breeze (what there was)
started to back, so the fleet compressed. The breeze kept backing, such that
Meller/Bruns found themselves sailing a "great circle", never quite able to lay
the windward mark on starboard, as they kept lifting on port. Eventually they
were able to lay, but they rounded only just ahead of Albert/Crane (who had
pulled into 2nd on the shift) and Hauser/Suki, with the Liebermans not far
behind.

All three teams gybe set in an effort to stay in the greater pressure, and were
forced to hold high to keep their kites drawing well. Meller/Bruns were again
feeling vulnerable with their small kite, but fortunately for them, the two
teams right behind them chose to stay high as well, rather than sagging off
below their course, and getting inside for the gybe. Meanwhile, the Liebermans,
noticing that the three teams ahead were sailing an angle nowhere close to the
finish line, gybed and aimed at the RC boat.

Meller/Bruns, anxiously keeping an eye on the two teams threatening their air,
sailed as far as they dared on port, and then gybed to starboard for a close
reach to the finish line. Albert/Crane and Hauser/Suki responded instantly and
gybed as well, but now the advantage was with Meller/Bruns, as they were equal
to the medium-spinnakered teams (or perhaps even a little faster) on the tight
reach.

Coming in from the corner with the only pressure on the course, the three lead
505s were going MUCH faster than the Solings and the two leading Vipers (the
last place Viper had chosen to sail the run the same way the lead 505s did),
and as they approached the finish line, it became apparent that they could
cross EVERYBODY, not just the Vipers that had started 5 minutes earlier, but
the Solings that had started 10 minutes earlier.

Separated by only a few boatlengths, the 505s were 1,2,4 (a Soling held up
Hauser/Suki), with the Liebermans not far behind, but in the Soling/Viper pack.
The last place Viper that chose to follow the 505s, passed both his competitors
to win the Viper race.

The breeze having gotten lighter, further racing was abandoned by common
agreement and all three classes sailed in.

A short 505 debrief was held while derigging to go over tuning and setup,
tactics, and what people saw in terms of wind and shifts. All four teams had
set up with maximum pre-bend to flatten the mainsail, but outhaul settings had
varied (Meller/Bruns eased outhaul somewhat to compensate for the pre-bend's
tendency to overflatten the bottom of the main).
