2000 Bristol Spring

Bass Master Does it Again!

In what is threatening to become tradition, Team Bass Master (Dave Dyson & Neal
Fowler) sailed a consistent series to take the Bristol Spring for the third
year in a row. Despite a shifty E/NE breeze, the Bristol YC race committee did
a phenomenal job, snapping off 8 gold cups over the two days. Dyson & Fowler
came out swinging, posting two consecutive bullets to lead the day (possibly
due to the fact that they went sailing while the rest of us were BS'ing in the
parking lot all morning), but Marty & Jeff took the third race, hinting at the
Bass Master's vulnerability. Macy & Mike took the Saturday's final race, with
Tom Kivney & Fran Charles in second. As the breeze died and the rain began to
fall, it was back to BYC for pizza & beer. A rambunctious evening followed as
an increasingly rowdy contingent headed off to Gillary's, then crashed Collins'
party. Sunday dawned cold, overcast, and not particularly breezy, but by the
time we reached the course (and rabbit Chuck & Chad arrived) the breeze had
filled back in. Marty & Jeff took the first race, while the Bass Masters had
what would be their drop (8). A scary moment for the fleet occurred in Race 2
as the Ferrarone brothers led at the windward mark, but the old guard put them
back in their place. The Pump showed a return to form (sources indicate that
Bill's surgically enhanced elbow now allows him to beat Tim from the wire) as
they took bullets in 6 & 7, and a second in the final race. The Pimp's, er,
Pump's late charge was not enough however, and Dyson & Fowler posted a 2, 2, 1,
taking the final race and the series.


Thanks to the BYC for hosting this event, and special thanks to Kinder
Industries for providing the great prizes.  Scores follow.

Ted Ferrarone

USA 7068 Region 1 Social Chairman & Co-founder Ferrarone Brothers Car Detailing Service
