Ali Meller's write up of the Canadians:    
The 2022 International 505 Class Canadian Championship

The 2022 505 Canadian Championship was held at the Nepean Sailing Club
as part of the club’s annual FANFARE multi-class event, September 10 th
and 11 th . Several one design classes: Club 420s, Albacores, Fireballs
and 505s, had separate starts, with the RC signalling which colour
windward mark would be used by each class, but classes using the same
start line, leeward mark, and finish line. 505 class competitors were
mostly from the Ottawa area and nearby Quebec, Kingston, and Toronto,
with one competitor from Maryland.

The breeze both Saturday and Sunday was light and shifty, though there
were moments on Sunday were 505 crews were trapezing high on the twire.
Apart from several course changes done by moving the windward marks to
accommodate wind shifts, the RC had to move the entire race course each
day due to 180 degree shifts. The pressure was so light at times that
you couldn't fill the spinnaker and it was hard to keep the boats
moving. There were puffs, holes with no wind pressure, big shifts, and
more, causing dramatic place changes around the race course; it was
remarkably easy to go from 1 st place to the back of the fleet by
sailing into less pressure. At least one race finish featured much of
the 505 fleet crossing the finish line overlapped. The Race Committee
staff recording the finish order had to review phone video to determine
the finishing order, and appear to have awarded equal finishes – a tie
– for two 505s in one of those races.

Robert Bartlewski and 13-year-old daughter Sabina Bartlewski from the
Outer Harbour Centreboard Club in Toronto managed to avoid finding light
wind pressure spots late in a race, and counted all 1sts and 2nds
(throwing out a 3 rd place) on their way to winning the 2022
International 505 Canadian Championship. Robert also won the 505
Canadian Championship last year in Kingston with a different crew. Jeff
"Boyder" Boyd and Martin “Marty” tenHove from Kingston Yacht Club were
2nd, two points back, after throwing out their worst race score. Evania
Lovshin/Ali Meller (Britannia YC/Nepean SC and Annapolis Maryland
respectively) were 3rd, Marie Gendron/David Browne from Nepean Sailing
Club were 4th, Marg Hurley/Andrew Gesing (Nepean SC/Kingston YC) were
5th.
