505 American Section Webmaster via googlegroups.com 

Though tenuously an “East Coast” venue, Kingston YC hosted the event
we’ve all been waiting for, even if a bunch of East Coasters couldn’t
make it thanks to just having done the Worlds, or other lame excuses
like Tom “COVID” Kivney had. Cross-border travel is now a snap, thanks
to Ali letting us all know about the ArriveCAN app and the US’s
nonchalant land-based border protocols. It was great to have the
Canadian and US fleets back together again.

Kingston laid out the welcome mat for 3.75 US teams and 12.25 Canadian
teams. Jeff and Flo Boyd hosting a fun evening at their house that’s
almost on the clubhouse grounds on Friday, and a post-racing spread at
the club on Saturday. PRO Bill Visser and his team walked through the
vagaries of weak troughs in the lower Midwest and widespread
thunderstorms to serve up 7 great races over the 3 days.

Friday was the postcard Kingston day – the thermal clouds built during
the skippers meeting and by the time we hit the course it was solid
upwind trapping with how to sail the runs in the “good question” column.
Sitting was the right answer. Ethan Bixby and Chris Brady held off
a bunch of challenges from various teams to start their recurring theme
to open with a win over Keith Longson and me, followed by Macy
Nelson/Nate Barton. The breeze built through the second and third races,
with minor variations on the first race’s finish order. Robert
Bartlewski and Andrew Gesing and legends Boyd and ten Hove were
constantly in the mix, with Lovshin family members inevitably sniffing
the front from time to time (they were 1/6th of the fleet, after all).
By race three it was “east coast nuking” with Paul Place and Devlin
Lovshin hitting speed records on the beats. Pink boats are fast. Though
they occasionally let others cross them and lead them around marks,
Ethan and Chris managed to always find the front at the critical time.

The thermal machine made a noble fight against a consistently described
“weak lower-level trough” between Michigan and Ohio, but by shortly
after noon we had enough breeze to leave the dock and get a start off at
130. Keith and I had a cracker of a start and first beat to lead while
Ethan and Chris were uncharacteristically deep and couldn’t find the
passing lanes. Down the last run it was “just sail straight to the
finish” until it wasn’t. Ethan and Chris, followed by the just-arrived
Marek and Alex, found the golden ticket puff to begin the run. Ethan and
Chris went from 6th to 1st, with Marek and Alex wedging between me and
Keith and the pack that had been 2nd – 5th to grab the 3rd. After
a brief wait, it was evident that the trough would prevail and we went
to the bar. At this point, the closest battles were between Macy/Nate
and me and Keith for 2nd overall, and Robert/Andrew and Jeff/Martin for
4th.

Ali showed up Saturday afternoon to regale us with tales from Ireland,
and then led a very productive discussion on Sunday morning while we
waited for thunderstorms to pass. Once the storms were gone, it was back
on the water in more “east coast nuking” (aka 18) to do as much sailing
as possible before a 1430 last start deadline. Needing to beat Macy and
Nate just once to secure second, Keith and I again narrowly snatched
defeat from the jaws of victory to let Ethan and Chris continue their
picket fence, with Macy/Nate in 3rd and Robert/Andrew in 4th.  Ethan and
Chris left early to pack up, leaving the rest of the nearly boats to
fight out being the other boat to win a race. At the top mark,
Jeff/Martin, Robert/Andrew and Keith and I were in a pile. With a good
set and good pace, we slipped away to finally win one, with
Robert/Andrew 2nd and Jeff/Martin 3rd.

A big percentage of the fleet was able to make their boats go through
the water quickly enough, but Ethan and Chris just never slowed down and
were able to be directionally correct enough to do what they did to the
rest of us.

One very cool note on the awards – Jeff donated a pile of his lifetime
stash of CORK award plaques to be repurposed with new event/placement
labels and creating totally unique and awesome awards, but of course in
taking 5th he didn’t quite get rid of all of them. 

