Zimbabween Nationals
alimeller@aol.com (Ali Meller)



The 1998 Dinghy National Championships Kariba
505 News from Zimbabwe

With the recent departure of Nic Jones to England, Mike Price to Kariba, and
the terrifying fact that Justin Bird has a Job I was anxious at one stage that
we would not make a class for the first time in 13 years. However with the
news that 3 boats were coming from South Africa and Justin making a supreme
effort to get to Kariba for the first part of the regatta my fears proved to
be unfounded and we were lucky enough to have a good class and some very good
racing. 

The social life was wonderful and for a change the various attractions of
Kariba did not cause a general diaspora in all directions. A memorable class
braai was held on the beach at Mika Point. Obviously the fame of 5o5 ers has
spread far and wide as we had a gate crasher in the form of a large and
randomly mobile hippo, who came to share a few jokes with us. The funniest
joke of all was the 30 people that instantly leapt into the back of the
nearest vehicle, a short wheel base Mazda Bakkie. Pity nobody from Guiness
book of records was there.The guest departed as rapidly as he had arrived and
for the rest of the evening we could hear him or her chortling with his mates.

Race by Race Report.  Day 1 Race 1 Neutral start. Long Race. Half trapezing to
less.  Excellent start all round. Redmile first going up first beat. Groves
and Lewis OK Milne going slow and out to the Right. First Mark, Redmile
followed by Groves. Redmile goes to high on the first reach. Marks very
difficult to see. Lewis Milne stay low. At Gybe mark, Groves O'Connor Milne.
Groves mistakes the Optimist windward mark (aided and abetted by a motor boat
sitting on the mark) for our mark and loses considerable ground. Over the
sausage positions change several times, with Lewis overtaking Groves but being
overtaken by Milne, and then Groves re-going past Lewis. Position at last
windward mark Milne Groves Lewis. Stayed that way to the finish with Milne
beginning to stretch the lead a bit. 

Day 2  Race 2. Port Bias start. Short race. Half trapezing.  Reasonable start
fleet sailing up on starboard with Milne and Groves in command. Ballantyne and
Redmile in close attendance. Fleet tacks onto Port and Lewis who has had
a slightly late start continues out closer to the lay line, tacks and lays the
mark on a lifting curve to be a clear first with Milne and Redmile following.
Groves gets dirty wind from Milne approaching the mark, and struggles a bit
for boat speed in the light wind. Huge fight for 4th place Groves/ Redmile/
Ballantyne/ Bird. Up the last beat Lewis capsizes to allow Milne into first
place followed by Redmile and Groves. Lewis takes two places on last run.
Milne, Lewis, Redmile, Groves.

Day 2  Race 3 Short race. Half trapezing plus.  Lewis early for the start goes
back and gets involved with Ballantyne starting late on Port. Crash tack crew
falls out of boat. Groves and Milne well away with Redmile 3rd. Lewis closes
to 4th with close racing for the lower places. Baker premature starter fails
to go back but is beaten in by newcomers Wendy Hulley and David Millway.

Day 2 Race 4. Short race. Occasional full trapezing.  Groves goes mad at the
start, starting late on Port tack having to go behind the entire fleet and in
the process catching the tip of one of the starboard tackers booms. 720 in
a 30 minute race makes life very difficult. Lewis leads at the first mark
extends a little on the reach but fails to cover Milne on the last beat
allowing Milne to round the final windward mark slightly ahead. Lewis gybes
and gybes back to try to attack Milne from below. Doesn't work so Milne
finishes first again with Lewis 2nd. Groves flies up through the fleet to
snatch 3rd.

Day 3 Race 5 Long race. Minor Port Bias. Wind decreasing throughout the race,
marginal trapezing on the first beat.  Milne leads at the first mark but goes
to high on the reach. Lewis goes low and arrives at the gybe mark first. There
after Lewis and Milne sail away from the fleet with Lewis in control until 3/4
up the last full beat. Once again Lewis allows Milne to get to far out and
find a favourable lift. Milne admits later to tacking entirely on the compass
as the visibility was so poor that telling wind direction by using landmarks
was impossible. Milne also seems to adjust his rig better to the dieing wind
which gave a noticeable performance edge later in the race. Last two reaches
pretty even and a dead last beat to allow Milne a comfortable 150yd win.
Ballantyne closes rapidly on Groves over the last triangle but is unable to
overtake him before the finish. Closest race is between Bird and Price who
change places at least 6 times during the race. Despite furious covering on
the short beat to the finish Bird just manages get through Price on the
penultimate tack before the finish.

Day 4 Short race Race 6. Light Wind. Port Bias.  Redmile excellent start with
Groves in close attendance. First mark Redmile struggles to get the spinnaker
up and loses to Groves and Milne. Ballantyne going well in 4th with Lewis 5th.
Ballantyne and Lewis overtake Redmile while Milne gets past Groves on the last
run. Lewis hits the last mark, and allows Redmile and Ballantyne through while
doing a 360. Redmile catches Ballantyne on the last run to grab 3rd. 

Day 4.Short race Race 7. Freshening wind. Some full trapezing. Line almost
neutral.  Lewis starts in the middle of the line, tacks early onto Port and
crosses the fleet on the Starboard lay line. Fast tight reach allows the light
weight combination to open a big lead going into the second  beat. Lewis
rounds the leeward mark and leaves half his spinnaker on the mast with the
other half in the shute and retires. Milne thankfully grabs 1st place again
with Redmile a very good second. Groves has picked up weed soon after the
start which drops him back to 7th at the first mark. A good reach helps to
close the gap but only manages to pull back to 4th.

Day 4. Short Race. Race 8. Large Port Bias. Dying wind.  Baker starts at the
Committee boat end on Port and fetches the first Mark without a tack. Milne
just pips him to win yet again. By this stage of the regatta 4 boats have had
second places. Lewis. Groves, Baker, Redmile. 1st overall is clear but from
2nd to 5th is by no means settled.

Day 5. Short Race. Race 9 Lightest wind of the regatta. Short course.  Not
a lot to write home about. Long paddle home. Lewis has an incident with
Ballantyne and has to do a 720 on the last leg to lose 2 places.  1st  Milne,
2nd Groves, 3rd Redmile, 4th Ballantyne, 5th Lewis 6th Price.

Day 6. Short Race. Race 10. Half trapezing. Neutral Start.  Lewis wins at last
to spontaneous applause from the finishing and spectator boats. Ballantyne
2nd. Milne and Price have swopped boats for this race as their overall
positions have been established. Milne shows that the helm is also a vaguely
important part of the racing team by rounding the 1st mark in front of his own
boat. A charged Price comes flying through the fleet to finish 4th. Groves
with a small piece of weed on the very bottom of his rudder goes like a brick
up the first beat leaving a lot of work to be done. Groves worst race 5th.

Day 6 Short Race. Race 11.Neutral Start. Half Trapezing.  Milne 1st, Groves
2nd, Redmile 3rd, Lewis 4th. Lewis' crew manages to fall out of the boat
during a very enthusiastic roll tack to lose 2 positions. Catches them on the
next beat but then hits the windward mark. Ballantyne 5th.

Day 6.Short Race. Race 12. Slight Port Bias.  Lewis rounds the first mark
a comfortable first with Groves second Milne third. Dull reach. Groves has
a look at Lewis going up the last beat but then to the huge relief of Lewis
decides its safer to cover Milne allowing Lewis to open a good gap up for the
closing run. Groves 2nd and Milne 3rd.



I think comment must be made of young Simon Lewis who helmed Absolutely 4th
Street with Kevin O'Connor crewing. This was only his second experience of
sailing a 505 and had his crew not torn his spinnikar in a fit of enthusiasm
he could have finished a lot better. Certainly one to watch for the future.

Another young sailor was Craig Redmile who alternately crewed for and steered
for Guy. This combination went extremely well and to my mind was certainly the
dark horse in the fleet. Guy's tuning ability, ideally suited for Kariba
certainly allowed the boat to be fast enough to be competetive. With a little
more practise in spinaker handling and more team work they could also have
gone better.

Grant Ballantyne got faster and faster through out the regatta and there was
at times litle to show that his 20 year old boat was any slower than the
newest in the fleet.

