The Invitation Race.

Afleet of 50, began in a 10-12 knot North-easterly about two kilometers of
shore, Standard for Sydney, but died out to almost nothing towards the end of
the race. The front Pack of about six boats were all very close, although the
front two boats, Chris Nicholson and Dave Porter cleared out towards the
end.The Finish between the next six or seven boats was very close as the
extremely long (1.5 n. miles) last upwind leg was in about 3-4 knots. For the
majority of the fleet this was too much and several of the back markers pulled
out. Again the likes of Hugh Stodard, continued to excel, but it was Nicholson
who sent out a fresh warning to all, in a new boat and plenty of local
experience.

Heat1

The first heat, saw a fresh 25-30 south east-breeze with a 1.5 - 3.0 meter
swell. Many boats over layed the windward mark as the buoy drifted but again it
was Nicolson who lead. Showing he is definitely suited to all conditions. The
first reach was main and jib only as the mark had drifted and in the swell was
playing havoc with those trying to hold height with spinnakers up. The gibe
mark proved spectacular with several boats finding the swell difficult to
handle. But once around Spinnakers went up and it was a surf down to the
leeward mark.

The second up wind leg was a little more true as the mark had been replaced.
(we were gradually pegging back a few boats) The swell proved a handful for the
West Australian sailors as they had never seen anything like it before. The
square run enable the fleet to test its wave riding skills as the swell was
directly behind us, many gains were made during this leg for the boats that
sailed as low a possible with the surf.The next triangle saw the breeze die off
a bit. Due to the surf a lot of the top guys had let their jib leads out
completely and this allowed them to get through the swell.This proved a good
tactic as we made up plenty of yardage on the boats in front of us. The two
reaches proved to be good rides as the fleet went for spinnakers. The final
windward leg saw the first three boats finish within 20 seconds of one another.
First Chris Nicholson, Second Hugh Stodard, Third Les Nathason, Fourth Michael
Page.

Interesting to note that three of these four boats are new boats, all built by
Paul Kulmar, also Dave Porters who came second in the invitation.

All in all it was a well sailed race by all in trying conditions, with about
four DNS's there were only three DNF's.

Heat 2

Again In a fresh South easterly breeze the Fleet did well to get around the
challenging offshore course.

The Course was set at a lower angle than the first heat which provided more
spectacular Spinnaker runs but again on the works the swell provided plenty of
frustration as well as disappointment as it was quite common to be looking at
picking up several places only to cross at a latter stage and lose seven or
eight places. If only we’d gone left…..

Yet again the consistency of Nicholson and Boyd proved the main heart ache for
the majority of the top end of the fleet, another win to the 18 Footers
Champion, but it wasn’t all easy sailing. The consistency of Hugh Stodard and a
continuance of the form that saw him do so well in the Townsville Worlds saw
him leading around the wing mark for the last time in first place.

With a Carbon Fibber rudder on board Hugh was sailing his new Kulmar boat
across a particularly hairy reach with a lead of about 50 meters, keeping his
boat between Nicholson and himself. But as they say its not over ‘till the fat
lady sings and misfortune laid it eyes on “TWO BOYS & A BOAT” and the rudder
Hugh described as “learning how to use power steering for the first time” came
away from the transom ending Hugh’s second heat one leg from victory.

Again the constant drive from Les Nathason and crew S Gorman were always
snapping at the heals of Nicolson yet keeping the efforts of Dean Blatchford
and crew as well as Malcolm Page and brother David.

HEAT 3

The Third heat of the 39th Australian Titles saw similar conditions to the
first and second heats, a lot of chop and a fair amount of breeze, 15-25 knots
out of the south-east. This race proved a another challenge that the fleet
stood up to well. With quite a few DNS’s dew to the previous few days blustery
conditions, 43 boats began the race, and to their credit all boats finished the
race. Congratulations to all sailors.

Race three went by the book again in that Nicholson got up for another win, but
the real interest was beginning to rise in the minor places, with the likes of
Leslie Nathanson and Hugh Stodard and well as Terry Kyrwood all putting in good
performances that would see the top 10 boats all finish within five minutes of
one another. Another consistent performance by Malcolm and David Page on Fire
Stopping as well as the effort of Dean Blatchford saw them ensure that the
overall order of minor places would go down to the wire.

With attention rising in the other competitions such as Handicap and the
Seniors, Terry Kyrwood began his assault on the Much coveted “walking stick”
prize for the senior sailors, whilst Tony Smith sailed well to secure the
corrected time prize for the heat.

Although not officially a part of the Regatta, The New Years Eve Party at the
club deserves a mention, dew to the fact that 200 people were expected and
about 500 turned up. A good night was had by all and by the end of the night
everyone was looking forward to the next days lay day.

HEAT 4

After a well earned lay day the fleet moved into the second half of the Regatta
and fine conditions for sailing, a change from the overcast conditions earlier
races. Positions at the top of the overall placing, with the acceptation of
Chris Nicholson and Gary Boyd in first with an untarnished record with three
wins from three. The minor places were heating up with Las Nathason, Dean
Blatchford, Hugh Stodard and Malcolm Page all proving that consistency is the
secret to a successful regatta.

Being sailed in the Typical breeze that Sydney enjoys, a 10-20 knot Nor-Easter,
the fleet again proved itself to be as stable as any when all 46 starters in
the heats finished within 25 minutes of one another. The minor places in this
races were probably the most hard fought of the entire regatta, due to the fact
the out-of-town boats were able to deal with the conditions better and the
breeze remained true on all parts of the course. It was not common to see boats
gaining ten or so places due flat out boat speed.This was no more evident than
when Brett Whitbread (8617) went up the second work in seventh place only to
tack under the leaders half way up the beat.The start in this race proved to be
the critical moment as the breeze had not settled and was swinging North.
Several lesser known boats were to figure in the rounding of the first mark.
Michael Page again figures in the top ten and did well to figure so high due to
the lighter conditions, definitely not his crews suited breeze.

But again Nicholson proved that he is suited to all conditions and took out the
race by over a minute. Many were beginning to think he was just playing with
our minds.

HEAT 5

Today’s conditions saw a return to the previous days, possibly a little less
breeze. As with heat four the race was postponed for about half an hour to
allow the boats to travel the 4 kilometers approx. to the course. The race was
started by Michael Quirk on his boat No Strings Attached (8280) a boat without
side stay tension or the like.

The start again proved to be the major deciding factor in the race with the
breeze again lifting for the boats going to the right of the course. Les
Nathason was forced of the start by Hugh Stodard and had to sail to the right
hand lay line. This proved to be good luck in that with the breeze shifting
north he went around the top mark about ten seconds ahead of Ian Gibson
(8628).Several up the top boats who had been performing well previously
struggled off the start with several having to fight hard to regain top ten
positions. A solid effort on the first work by Ian Dun (8603) set him up for a
good finish. A former champion in Terry Kyrwood was beginning to stake his
claim on one of the top three positions with another good finish in second.

But the day belonged to Les Nathason on Maroon Magic taking the honors from
Chris Nicholson for the first time in the regatta and finished well ahead of
Terry Kyrwood in second and Nicholson’s ironically named “Slow Boat” in third.
Malcolm Page again proved the silent achiever with a gallant fourth after a
start I’m sure he would rather forget.Proving again to all that sailing a 505
is a lot more important than spending a race adjusting things on the boat was
Michael Quirk who again finished well in the lighter air with a fifth.

A mention must go to the Husband and Wife combination on No Canoe who with
limited time in their boat did well to pick up the adjusted time first place.
Well done, and as Tony Smith said at the presentation the real feat is that
they are still talking to one another.

HEAT 6

With the two top places of the Regatta already decided, Chris Nicholson first
and Les Nathason second, the third race, these two decided to sit out the final
heat, Chris going to practice on his 18 footer and Les deciding against doing
any damage.

The race was sailed in lighter conditions (10-15 knots) and it proved to be a
hotly contested race by the boats aiming for the final top ten overall
positions.The race saw several changes in position for several boats. The
lighter conditions again helped the lighter crews with several boats that had
struggled in the earlier heats doing very well. None more than Richard Needham,
who still qualifying for the junior competition, led for the majority of the
race and took out first place.He won by a narrow twelve seconds to Terry
Kyrwood who was proving that with some practice before the regatta may have
challenged the first two boats. Dave Porter put in his best performance for the
series with a fifth whilst again Dean Blatchford and Michael Quirk took out
third and fourth respectively with consistent races.

This race played havoc with many as it upset a lot of plans, overall placings
wise, with several of the regular top boats finishing out of the top five. The
race was sailed well as in all other heats and it was good to see that although
serious about the racing boats were not bothering about covering the fleet just
the boats that they had bet beers with.
