Midwest - Regatta Results
Gim Hobelman (open class regatta)- Chicago - August 1&2

All 5-0-5 regattas are good in their own way, each has it’s high points even if
it gets down to only being able to spend a weekend sailing the greatest boat
ever designed and built -- The International 5-0-5.

In the case of Gim Hobelman - 1998 we didn’t need to rely on only a great boat,
such as the 5-0, to have a great time. Those who have been at this game for a
while, as I have, know that a bit of a breeze for two days in a row on a
weekend in early August on southern Lake Michigan occurs about only once or
twice in the span of a 5-0-5er’s life. Well it happened this very weekend. The
result was that everybody had their "race legs of glory" and a real good time.
Jeanette (5-0-5 Kaiser) did her thing from her new “Jeanette’s Kitchen” and fed
the hungry teams. The club invited us to return and all were highly impressed
with the boat. Many stopped by before and after each day of racing to see "what
these things look like up close". This regatta marked the first for our newly
forming Chicago 5-0 fleet. Allan Brown has moved his boat into Corinthian Yacht
Club’s dry mooring area with Mark Derry’s and also my boat to soon follow. This
will give us three and fleet status at the club and more boats will follow.
With the support demonstrated by all those who traveled to participate in the
regatta and join in the fun, the club was highly impressed. So I want to
especially thank those who traveled afar. You can see who they are from the
regatta standings below. And check out these results! One better mark rounding
or tack by any of the boats could have well shifted the points enough to give
totally different standings.

More than "good boat" thing came from the regatta. We all know this because of
Ali’s superior skill and effort, but it was warming to have several people come
up to me and say " 5-0-5, WOW! Your web page is absolutely Awesome"!!


Good Sailing to All!!

Ki Kaiser
