Hyannis 505 Hospice Regatta
August 15 & 16, 1998
By Tim Collins

The 505 class was invited to the 1998 Hospice regatta thanks to the persuasion
of HYC club member Gerard Kivney. Special thanks to Neil Fowler and Bill Smith
for putting together the race instructions, and the HYC RC as they did a great
job running the six races (no throw), combination of Modified Olympics and
Modified Triangles.

A high pressure positioned just SE of Nantucket made for some interesting and
difficult conditions; chop/slop (similar to a summer day on the Chesapeake)
combined with an occasional high-speed ferry and leeward mark roundings with
the J-22’s. Race #1 started in 5-6kts, SSW, and by race #3 it had backed to the
South and built to 13 kts. or so. The Alarie/Zani team had it figured out with
finishes of 1,2,1, to become day one leaders. Equally impressive were Team Spot
(Falssone/Harris) finishing 3,1,2.

Day two - Same high pressure as Sat. just weaker, race 4 started in 5-6kts.
SSW, and built to maybe 10 kts. by race 6, again backing to the South. The chop
wasn’t nearly as brutal as Sat. Race 4 & 5 went to Smith/Collins (3rd after
Sat), a couple of 4th’s by Alarie/Zani, combined with Dyson/Fowler 2,3, brought
the top four within four points of each other for the last race. Dyson/Fowler
jumped out to an early lead but were not able to put enough boats in between
themselves and Alarie/Zani to take the win. Alarie/Zani were able to hold off
Smith/Collins and Team Spot for the narrow victory. Special thanks to the
Hyannis Yacht Club for supporting the 505 Class prior the NA’s and World
Championships to be held at HYC in September.
