est River SC 505 Open House/Regatta
June 27th

Breeze. Turnout. Cold Beer. We had all the essential ingredients for an
ideal 505 regatta at West River Sailing Club June 27. This was the first
year that WRSC hosted the one day event. The idea behind it was to
provide a forum for some casual club racing, work in some people new to
the class and do a little socializing after racing. Eleven boats showed
and there were plenty of new faces mixed in with the veterans.

Long time 505 sailor Bob Hill, who has scaled back his sailing in recent
years, took his boat out for a sail. He joined Nicholas Place (sailing
with his brother) Clayton James (teamed up with Les Crane) as well as
Mike Breton, Tom Price, Sterg Papadakis (down from NJ), Team Spot, De La
Rie-Freedman, Ali Meller and Sol Marini, who sailed a borrowed boat.

We also had four recruits, who we worked in to the action, including
local talents Dustin Romey (410-721-6964, dustin_romey@hotmail.com) and
Chris Hodge (410-867-0119; Chris lives across from the club and is
always ready to go for a ride) and Michigan U sailor Eric Carlson
(410-267-6926, ecarlson@gibbscox.com) and former collegiate, big boat
and current Interclub sailor Ray Wulff (RMWulff@leggmason.com). For
those keeping score at home, Ray drove Barney Harrisâ€™ boat in two races
with Jesse Falsone on the wire, and looked very competitive.

The 5-16 knot westerly conditions were ideal for breaking new people in.
RC chairman John Braddon managed to fire off four races. The rule of
thumb seemed to be that you could not go wrong going right. Velocity and
direction definitely paid on that side of the course, and boats that set
up high on the layline could usually catch a shot and get launched down
to the mark.

Barney Harris organized a cookout after racing. And on Sunday three
boats went out to do a little tuning, with Romey and Hodge crewing for
Ali and Sterg respectively. The event was a definite success and we plan
to repeat it next year and add at least one more one day event during
the season. In the mean time, we plan to do some "organized practice
sessions" in July. Look for days and times shortly. Keep sailing!

Please get with one of our new recruits and take them out sailing.

Allan Freedman
