Southern California Midwinters, 1996

On February 17th & 18th, the Southern California Midwinter's were held at
Alamitos Bay Yacht Club. It was a multi class event sailed inside the
breakwater. We had 10 5o5s from Northern and Southern California and even
Colorado. Top talent from all over the globe flew in to race this event. North
American Champion, Robin Brown came down to sail with Mike Martin and escape
the arctic conditions of the great white North. Two time World champion Cam
Lewis flew in from Maine to sail with the famous Howard Hamlin, who was back in
the States after teaching the boys down under a few tricks at the 18 foot Skiff
worlds in Sydney. Mike Holt from England (and now California) teamed up with
Bruce Edwards who was making his debut in the front of the boat.

Ed. Well, I did think Bruce was looking a little heavier, recently

The weather was beautiful and sunny with 10 to 15 knots of breeze on Saturday
and about 8 to 10 on Sunday. There were three races each day. Racing was very
tight; after the first day there was a tie for first between Heckman-Miller,and
Martin-Brown, with Cam and Howie only 1/4 point behind. Race 2 of the series
was highlighted by Bruce Edwards, and Mike Holt giving some lessons on reaching
on the downwind leg where they managed to sail from a distant fifth place at
the weather mark to a 100 yard lead at the leeward mark. The second race on
Sunday had the unintended option of two weather marks. The race committee set a
course using a permanent mark as the weather mark, Unfortunately there were two
permanent marks with the same #. To make matters worse exactly half of the
fleet sailed around each. fortunately it made little difference in the final
standings. Results are listed below:


Mike Martin
mmartin@cbm.canon.com
