CORK 1997 and The Eastern Canadian Championship


First Report by Geoff Cashman


Here’s a (short) report from a newcomer to this regatta: 

First, I decided early in the year, "I’m going". Then my crew couldn’t go. "I
might not be going". So, I get new crew; "I’m going". Then my new crew has an
operation; "I’m not going". Then a few days beforehand, I got a call from
someone who also needed crew. Ok, I’m going :)

 Really short summary: What a great place to sail!!!!!! 

Addendum to the really short summary: Get a Waterat :) (they dominated) 

Eighteen 505s descended upon Kingston, Ontario for three days of sailing from
August 22nd to the 24th. Racing occurred on the Alpha course just outside the
harbor. Also launching from our harbor were several inferior classes; 470s,
fireballs, J-24s, Europes... 

Racing was really quite close over the three days. Jeff Boyd proved once again
that he has a secret pact with the local wind gods (not to mention some damn
fine sailing).  

Friday’s wind conditions weren’t all that great. The first race was trapeze
conditions, but nothing strong. The second race lightened up, and the committee
wisely decided not to run a third race on Friday. 

Saturday, the fabled Kingston winds kicked in and 505s were seen to dance with
glee... Winds got stronger and stronger as the day went on, and racing was fast
and furious. Three races were run with the last being the windiest. The
1.5-mile reach back to the club after that race was incredible. We were still
talking about it hours later.  

Sunday the wind was not quite as strong, but it was 100% trap wind.

 Russell Coutts put in an appearance at the sailing center on Saturday evening
and gave a speech.

 All in all, it was a great regatta. The CORK staff were helpful, results were
posted pretty rapidly, and the committees did a good job.

 Also; on the last pier on the way out of the harbor there was a group of women
who each day came out to say good luck to the departing boats, and were there
to welcome them back in. Some days they were even dressed in pseudo-Hawaiian
outfits. Rather interesting :)

  - Geoff Cashman

US6660



A Second Report by Mike Hoffman and Chris Gillies

Eighteen boats (5.5 from USA, the rest from Canada), came to Kingston to enjoy
its famous sea breezes during the 1997 version of CORK, August 22 - 24. While
many of the big sailors were wrestling it out in Denmark at the Worlds, and
with an East Coast regatta the weekend before, attendance was still higher than
expected. Although the famous Kingston thermal never really got going until
de-rigging time, 7 races were held during the three days.

After almost 2 years of not sailing, Jeff Boyd showed once again he can
dominate the 505 Fleet, sailing nearly perfectly during the regatta with only
one blemish during a gybe in the 5th race.

Friday, racing was delayed, as little wind was around at 9:30 launch time.
While the committee postponed on shore, winds began to build and they sent us
out at 11:00. Sailing in 12-15kn the first race favoured those that went right
but not too deep. The Saint-Cyr’s amazed everyone, as they returned from a 2
year holiday from sailing, finished 5th, putting the fear of God into many of
us who normally beat them.

The second race started in a dying 15kn with waves until the start of the
second upwind leg when the wind eased and left a lot of chop. Once again the
leading 3 boats broke away from the fleet and left the rest of us to fight it
out. In this race Jeff could at least see the numbers of James Englert sails
when he finished, as Jeff was pushed all the way around the course.

After racing over beer, there were boat modifications and tweaking to enhance
boat speed for the next day’s racing. Then most of the Fleet retired to the
Grizzley Grill to pig out and to dream of a better finish.

Saturday dawned with fog and no wind. The fog burnt off around 9:00 and they
sent us out at 10:30 after another onshore postponent. However, the sky was
filled with cumulus clouds, a very few of which were accompanied with downpours
and classical downdraft winds in the 20-25 knot range. Luckily, we missed most
of the rain but got most of the wind. We got the first race off in 10-12kn.
With the wind more out of the west than normal, the course played pretty even
from both the corners. This race was still dominated by Jeff and James, but
John Bryant hung tough, leading for most of the race to finish 3rd. Pete
Spaulding came out of the right corner in the last leg to pick up 4 boats and
become the rabbit for the 4th race.

The 4th race had the most promise for wind with gusts of over 20kn during the
pre-race setup, as the rain showers were beginning to come in. However it did
not hold and the wind stayed at 15-18kn. There were no surprises, except for
Clarissa Bush [in her shiny newish Waterat: no coincidence?] sailing one of her
best races ever, and Ian Eskritt not able to power up and finish higher.

The fifth race showed who was in form as the wind once again was picking up.
The wind and a small shift resulted in a tight first reach where the early
boats hoisted and none of them could make the mark. This cost Clarissa Bush
(scribe’s skipper) 4 spots which we never made back. It was a thing of beauty
seeing Jeff half douse his chute for the last half of the leg, then hoist at
the gybe and be gone as if he always sails that way. However at the end of the
run he made his first and only mistake (he might feel that there were others),
and two boats got by.

 After racing we all retired to Jeff’s place for lasagna, beer and ice cream.
Life’s a beach.

The final day sunny, but with light wind. Getting on the water right on time
two races were sailed. The first in less than 10knts and the wind started
building in the second as a typical thermal started to build For the last race,
both the leaders could go home but Jeff, for training reasons and to sail the
first extended course, stayed on the water. Ian Eskritt really got the boat
moving to finish second to pass Clarissa for 6th spot. Despite the extended
course, boats were still very tight at the finish line. Following the race,
many (those that still had energy) had a great three sail reach to the harbour.

The regatta was sailed with 470’s (CORK Championship) and Fireballs (North
American Championships). The 505’s showed up with more boats and clearly
demonstrated that the 505 is a faster more fun boat. As a result, at least one
of the 470 teams expressed interest in trying a 505 at one of our local
regattas.


