505 Europeans in Copenhagen 1971

by Arnold Wechter


TWO-TIME Champion Larry Marks may have deserted the ranks for the Flying
Dutchman class and a shot at an Olympic berth but England still reigns
supreme in the international 505 scene. Veteran Derek Farrant with
brother Robin as his crew regained the title by winning the 16th world
505 championship held at Santa Cruz, California.  The championship was
held on the waters of scenic Monterey Bay under the sponsorship of the
Santa Cruz Yacht Club at the end of August.

Farrant made a fast start in the regatta by winning the first two races
and led at all times-though he was forced to stave off challenges by
Sweden's Stefan Sjöström and unknown Dave Vickland of Palo Alto, Calif.
Vickland finished only 2.7 points behind the veteran Farrant under the
Olympic scoring system. Farrant finished with 37.4 points to Vickland's
40.1.

Three other English boats were entered. Peter Bainbridge did an
excellent job of sailing to finish in third position with 48 points.
Mike Derry was tenth with 72.7 and the fourth skipper, Peter Buttigieg,
finished far down the list of 78 competitors with 251 points for 48th
spot.

Monterey Bay's famed westerly winds did not disappoint the large fleet.
Only the opening race was held in moderate winds, 3 to 12mph. Every
other race was a heavy weather event with a combination of high winds
and big seas.

The reaching mark, placed more than a mile from shore, became known as
`suicide point' and at times the area around the mark resembled
a disaster area between turtled boats and those with broken spars.

The Farrant brothers were in complete control in the first two races.
Each time they seized the lead at the start and never relinquished it to
the finish. Bainbridge pressed Farrant in the opener and finished only
25 yards behind.

In the second race held with the winds ranging from 15 to 20mph, Farrant
was chased doggedly by Dr. Dennis Surtees, the three-time North American
champion. But the Farrants got the edge shortly after the start with
a perfectly timed tack. Surtees would gain on the English boat on
reaches only to fall back on the beats.

The winds and sea kicked up a bit more during the third race and
Sjöström found the sloshy going to his liking. It was similar to the
first two races in that Sjöström took the lead at the start and was
never headed. It was the most one-sided race as the Swede finished more
than two minutes ahead of the second place boat skippered by Dick
Deaver, a Lowell North sailmaker from Seal Beach, Calif. Farrant
was sixth and Derry finished 11th.

Farrant had an opportunity to nail the lid on the series in the fourth
race. He started behind former world champion Marcel Buffet of France
but overtook him on the reach to the gybe mark but a bad gybe sent Derek
and Robin tumbling in the water. By the time they righted the boat
a large segment of the fleet had passed them, led by Buffet. Farrant
used the 23rd place finish as his throw out race.

Twenty boats failed to finish the race as the combination of heavy winds
and high seas dumped boats by the dozen. The lay day which followed the
fourth race was much needed by the tired skippers and crews and gave
them a chance to repair their boats.

The fifth race, which was won by Australia's national champion, Rod
Dalgleish, was another survival test. The race committee was forced to
shorten but even over the shortened course only 49 out of the 74
starters finished. The press boat was forced to stop following the race
and help join in as a rescue craft.

It was the lone race in which the westerlies played cruel tricks on the
skippers. The winds were not only shifty but inconsistent. There were
light winds at the start and near gales at the windward and gybe marks.
And no wind at the leeward mark.

Buffet and Surtees staged a duel for almost the entire race until
falling into a hole at the aforementioned mark. Dalgleish drifted around
and found the air before them and was able to scoot home free. Farrant
finished eighth to remain in the series lead.

The final race saw the winds continuing to howl-though somewhat lighter
than the previous two races-and the leaders playing it cautious. The
race was won by Santa Cruz' youthful Ray Pingree. It marked the first
time an American has won a race in 505 world competition. Farrant played
it cool and smart in an effort to make his dwindling lead hold up. He
even tacked around the gybe mark rather than risk a repeat of the fourth
race. He finished sixth, good enough for the championship.

Farrant almost played it a mite too cautious as only a bad break halted
Sjöström from sneaking in and stealing the title. The Swede was in
second place going for the final reaching mark. But his crew, Reine
Andersson, was hit by the boom during the gybe around the mark and
suffered a painful dislocated shoulder. The pair elected to complete the
race but slipped from second position to ninth. Had they been able to
hold their runner-up spot they would have edged Farrant. Vickland and
Pingree, complete unknowns and without a major regatta victory to their
credit, were the surprises of the regatta. Both, if they continue to
develop, should provide top helmsmen for the US, in future competition.

Farrant proved a popular winner in the California resort city. He
received cheers when he told the crowd at the awards dinner that the
area's sunny weather, beautiful scenery and hospitality had made him
consider moving to Santa Cruz. "But then I thought of regularly gybing
around 'Suicide Point' and I've decided to return home!"

From September 24th 1971 issue of Yachts & Yachting (page 669) 
