505 European Championship Hayling Island 17-23 July, 1976

One early July morning, a motley group of people were seen entering the
Fredrikshamn ferry in Gothenburg harbor. On closer inspection, it turned out to
be 505 sailors on their way to the European Championships in England. The
reason for the motley entourage was that the ferry companies did everything to
punch poor sailors. Therefore, two boats were loaded on each trailer and the
cars were packed with sailors, sails and supporters. The journey went from
Gothenburg to Fredrikshamn and further down to Esbjerg for ferry transport to
England, about 300 km. This complicated road was significantly cheaper than the
direct ferries. Unfortunately!

Once on the "island" we were met by an almost tropical heat and a tanned
landscape. London was passed in 3 hours in Friday rush hour. The cars almost
collapsed in the heat (not to mention the passengers).

After breaking all speed records between London and Hayling Island, we arrived
at the sailing club, which was located on its own peninsula, and here was
everything: its own restaurant and bar, changing rooms, showers, sleeping
cabins for participants or guests. Everything was not completely new, but what
if we had a single club like this in Sweden! 

The English met with open arms. The sail measurement was completed with record
speed. An extra boat measurement person was called in quickly to check four
brand new 505 hulls. Everything was peace and joy.

The following morning was devoted to fine tuning of the boats and until the
afternoon a tune-up race was offered for those who wanted to measure the speed
and test the tide. In the rather light winds, the Eklund brothers went and won
(a little tactless perhaps, you should always lie low during training
sailings). 

The starting field was impressive with 82 boats and lots of top sailers.
Reigning champion John Loveday with an almost new boat, oldtimers like "Father"
Derek Farrant and Marcel Buffet, Larry Marks world champion -69 and -70,
Nicholas Loday world champion -72, who now made an international comeback among
many others. The course was relatively far out to sea and sailed with two 60°
reaches. Gate start was used in almost all starts (see end of report).

Race 1

Light breeze at 3-4 m/s. The field is immediately crystallized into two main
groups - one that starts early in the gate and one group that starts as late as
possible. In the beginning it is advantageous for the latter group, but after
half of the beat the wind turns 45° and increases sharply. Cool reach to the
top mark where the race is interrupted. Fortunately. The wind and waves
increased rapidly and at the restart it blew about 10 m/s. The race will be a
great success for the Nordic countries with the brothers Andersson 4th and
Denmark 3rd and 5th. Loday/Federenko showed, through a sure victory, that they
still had the speed in strong wind. Other Swedes include Nilsson/Nilausen in
14th place and Eriksson/Lidman in 16th place.

Race 2

In the morning before the second race, the wind blew well out on the sea and
the start was postponed for a couple of hours. The start would then be at 15.00
even though it was blowing hard and with very difficult wave conditions on the
race area. The Race Committee did not dare to use gate start in the prevailing
wind but chose the conventional start system. The field came off fairly well,
but then the wind increased further during the entire first beat, so when the
first boats came up to the mark, it was barely possible to maneuver. Boats
capsized or crashed all over. The race was stopped and shortened only after the
second beat. Who was first if not the Andersson brothers followed by Jan Eppers
from Denmark. Only 28 of 81 starters managed to reach the finish line. It may
well be mentioned that some sailed to the finish on just the jib. The Race
Committee got a lot of work to get all the wreckers ashore. 29 broken masts
were counted, several broken centerboards and rudders, Englishman John Locke
got the mast in his head and had to be taken by helicopter from the sea to
hospital. The Eklund brothers broke the mast and were close to sinking, so they
had to cut the entire rig, which sank in the depths of the sea. You can imagine
what a queue there was at mast and accessory sellers that night: Larry Marks
e.g. had open at late night hour.

Race 3

The weather forecast for the third race still promised strong winds, albeit
calming, so the race could be started at normal time. Advantage of starting
late and going over to the starboard side of the track. First around the top
mark was the Frenchman Jérôme Langlois with Stefan Eriksson shortly after. Kalle
Nilsson rounded as 5th, Andersson 8th and Eckestrom another couple of boats
later. But the joy did not last long, when Eckestrom capsized on the second
reach and Stefan Eriksson was about to drop the mast at the beginning of the
second beat. The jib & forestay halyard sheave box slid 20 cm and it is not
possible to sail with such slack in the rig. The Andersson brothers, however,
worked their way up one by one and went in nicely as 3rd. The Englishman
Colclough won before Loveday, the Frenchman 4th, Kalle Nilsson finally became
8th after losing distance during the second beat.

Race 4

Gusty wind from land between 4-8 m/s and no waves to speak of. The gusty wind
(which kept turning) made it very difficult to sail. One moment you won by
going inland and the next moment it was an advantage in the other direction.
First around the top mark was the Irishman McCready closely followed by Loday.
Eriksson/Lidman was well part in the lead, also the brothers Andersson and
Eckestrom/Calvert were among the top ten. Loday soon took the lead and won
safely. Stefan Eriksson lost some places in the middle of the race, but sailed
absolutely right on the last beat and ended up in third place in the finish,
Andersson brothers 10th and Eckestrom 11th. Today's top performance was by the
Englishman Peter Colclough, who rounds the first mark in 60th place, but then
he goes like a spear and takes places on every bow. Especially on the high
reaches, he sails incredibly well. He is 2nd in the finish - nice sailing.

Race 5

The fifth race in a light breeze looked good for the Swedes when 300 m remained
to the first mark. Three Swedish boats at the top, as the wind turns 45° and
the entire port field can blur down to the mark. Some even hoist the spinnaker.
Who is first around if not another Swede, namely Ebbe Rosen/Olle Wenrup. They
lead big from the beginning and then surely guard their lead all the way to the
finish. For most Swedes, it will be a hunt for the lead from rather modest
positions. The Swedes sail up nicely as the wind increases and can note 1, 7,
8, 11. The Andersson brothers are fine with their eleventh place, and the
battle for the European Championship title is now between them, Colclough,
Loveday and Loday. Jan Eppers also has a small chance of victory. Andersson,
however, has a small advantage in that the other competitors all have a retired
race. So they have to place well in the last sailing. The excitement is great
before the decisive sailing.

Race 6

The weather is perfect with 3-4 m/s and the same wind direction as the day
before. The same pattern is repeated - the wind turns 45° in the last stage of
the first beat and who comes up to the mark first - if not Ebbe/Olle. However,
the race is completely interrupted, which should also have happened in the
fifth race in the opinion of many.

Then followed several hours of inconsolable waiting for the wind to stabilize.
The coarse was laid out - the wind turned and died out. Movement of the coarse,
but the wind turned again. The Race Committee laid out a normal starting line,
but then the wind turned again 15 sec. before the starting signal which
resulted in even this attempt was interrupted. The wind increased a couple of
m/s, so did the waves, which became enormously rough in just 10-15 minutes. In
a new start attempt, the field comes off and then follows a nightmare beat with
a calming wind in a choppy and high seas. Up at the top mark, the tide sets in
and the wind dies out almost completely. Only about 15-20 boats come around the
mark with the small remaining wind. This cluster manages to cover almost two
whole reaches before the others begin to come around the top mark. The
Andersson brothers' gold medal chances disappear here, as they get completely
stuck in the mess at the mark. The rest of the race is mostly straight sailing
to the marks, when the wind starts to blow again. A sad end to an otherwise
fine number of races. 

In total, Peter Colclough now won, he and his crew Phil Brown also nailed the
last race, very strongly done. Loday finished second after protesting away
Loveday (he still finished 11th). The Andersson brothers ended up being 3rd
overall.

About the Swedes' effort can be said that if the wind had been more stable, we
would probably have had a couple of European champions with us home. Several of
the other Swedes had good speed and were up and fighting at the top, but some
breakdowns did not give the even series required to place well at a European
Championship.


Jan Calvert

