Stokes Bay SC Open Meeting, 6/7 May 2000.
Richard Tew reports on the 505 Solent Championships at Stokes Bay:
There are certainly worse places than Stokes Bay to sit on the beach in
the sunshine waiting for a sea breeze to arrive. This was an event which
could have easily finished without a race sailed, however the persistent
race organisers managed to conjure up a two races to break up the
sunbathing.

The first race began with a 5-knot sea breeze and a beat with the tide.
Leaving the gate early and heading out to sea seemed to be the smart
move and Terry Scutcher / Richard Tew did this to good effect to lead at
the windward mark. John Donnelly / Kenneth Williams the pathfinders did
not suffer too much from being forced to go right and rounded in second
place closely followed by Clive Robinson / Gary Cawthorn.

As the majority of the fleet rounded the windward mark what was left of
the sea breeze vanished and a very light offshore wind filled in. The
change in direction combined with the strong tide meant that boats that
did not stay high lost out significantly. Scutcher / Tew held on to win,
Hector Cisneros / Lawrence Crispin came from nowhere to take second and
Stuart Turnbull / Jason Lunn finished third.

That was it for Saturday and on Sunday conditions were virtually
identical. The second and final race was sailed in a 5 knot sea breeze
and was dominated from start to finish by Robinson / Cawthorn. They led
comfortably at the first mark from Simon Payne / Bill Masterman. Gains
were possible on the first reach by going high with a strong current
pushing most of the fleet well below the lay line. Tew / Scutcher took
advantage of this and moved into second only to lose places on the final
beat. Payne / Masterman recovered to take second and Andy Williams and
Andy Edmonds came in 3rd. Overall Robinson's win gave him equal points
with Scutcher, but the tie was decided on the last race giving Robinson
overall honours.


