Chew Valley Lake SC: Training, 25 March & Open Meeting, 26 March 2000

George Simpkins reports: Three boats made it to Chew for the training
day: 7720 from Dale in Pembrokeshire, 8694 from Port Z and 8690 from
Chew. Jim Berry was absent, there being something about taking the wife
to France for the weekend to celebrate 25 years of wedded blitz (sorry,
BLISS). The on-the-water instruction was undertaken by Chris Romans.
The morning session was taken up with boat set-up and maintenance with
a lot of effort going into our Welsh friends' boat, the training proper
started after lunch and took place in ideal conditions, force 3 and
sunshine. Exercises were the usual tacking and gybing on a whistle
followed by two short races.

In the bar afterwards all agreed that it had been a good days exercise
and we looked forward to the morrow when we could have some proper
racing.

Dinner parties, a Curry house and two pubs with a village idiot in each
(see our Welsh friends) meant that we all arrived on the Sunday somewhat
less than perfect. We were joined by Rob Napier and Jonathan Rennie, and
Mike Leaver and Dylan Marvelly from King George Reservoir SC. We had
been promised 12 mph winds that would go from S.W. to N.W. and increase.
They were partly right, for the wind did fluctuate between these two
directions constantly and the strength went up and down, finally
settling on down to almost nothing to give us a very short last race.

Rob excelled at good starts and boat speed. Andy (8694) had good speed
but lacked local knowledge and a set of lucky dice, George had good
speed, local knowledge and lucky dice. With only two races sailed and
both to count.
