Hayling Island SC Open Meeting, 8-9 July 2000 (Sponsored by Tactick)

Report by Simon Payne:

With plenty of wind forecast, the racing promised to be excellent, and
so it turned out. After several windless regattas the 505 fleet headed
out into Hayling Bay for race one in ideal conditions. Race officer Tim
Hancock wasted no time in getting the fleet underway in south westerely
breeze of between 10-15 knots. The opposing tide saw the righthand side
of the course pay and it was Simon Payne and Bill Masterman with their
nose in front at the windward mark closely followed by Ian Pinnell and
Nic Powell with Dave Smithwhite and Paul Young third. The two leading
boats pulled away from the fleet, Pinnell put Payne under pressure and
closed on the last beat but Payne held on to take race one with Pinnell
second and Charlie Walters and Christian Diebitsch third.
Race two saw similar conditons but this time it was Pinnell who went
clear at the windward mark with Payne second and Debbie Jarvis and Dan
Johnson third. Payne closed on the reaches and moved into the lead on
the second beat, covering Pinnell to the finish with Jarvis third.

Sunday saw winds of around 20 knots which made crossing the Hayling bar
an exciting experience and windward/leeward courses set . With slightly
less wind at the start Hector Cisneros and Lawrence Crispin lead at the
first mark with Smithwhite second and Payne third. Gybing on the run,
Cisneros twisted his spinnaker and allowed Smithwhite into the lead but
Payne pulled through to win with Smithwhite second and Jarvis third.

Walters led Race 4 for the first lap but was passed by Payne and
Smithwhite, eventually taking third. Payne and Masterman, not needing to
sail the final race gratefully headed home for an early shower.

With second place up for grabs the final race saw Smithwhite surfing
down the run in first place but capsizing dramatically whilst gybing.
Cisneros took the lead and hung on to claim race five with Walters
taking second claiming second overall. Smithwhite remounted, came in
tenth and took third place overall.

With the European Championships at Abersoch in August and the promise of
some 70 boats, the weekend was an excellent warm up regatta.
