Europa Cup - Belgium
19 505's, from Britain, Germany, Switzerland and Belgium made the trip
to Nieuwpoort in Belgium for the fifth in this years Europa Cup
series. Competitors were greeted with 25 knot winds from the South
West with lumpy seas for the first two races on Friday, to be held on
a triangular course with a double length run and a short final beat.
A patern was quickly to emerge as Pinnell and Powell won the first
two races and Bohm and Roos took second place in both races. The
pecking order may have extended further down the fleet as Scutcher
and Tew took third place in the first race but were unable to compete
the second due to Tew suffering from an uncomfortable trapeze
harness! Instead third place was taken by Achterberg and Acterberg..

Conditions on Saturday remained much the same, although the wind had
moved slightly further round to the West. Again it was Bohm and Roos
and Pinnell and Powell who were the crews to beat. Bohm just led
Pinnell around the first mark in race three, only to capsize whilst
hoisting his kite and subsequently relinquising his lead. Despite
managing to pull back to second place further bad news awaited Bohm
when he came ashore and discovered that he had been disqualified for
jumping the start. Second place then went to Roos and Linnemann, with
Scutcher taking third place. Races four and five were again won by
Pinnell, with Bohm taking second place in both.

Sunday saw a marked change in conditions with the wind moving to the
North West and easing to fifteen to eighteen knots. Despite the
change in conditions Pinnell and Powell continued their winning ways
with two further wins and having done enough to secure the regatta
decided to head ashore without sailing the last race. Bohm had
a further two second places and a win in the last races to give him
second overall. Positions three, four and five though were much
closer. In the end Scutcher just beat Achterberg to third place and
Roos took fifth place overall.

Nic Powell
