1997 Pacific Coast Championship

September 20-21

The 1997 P.C.C.s were held at Richmond Yacht Club this past weekend. 20 boats
from Vancouver to Long Beach. attended the regatta. The weather was beautiful
with 8 to 15 knots of wind on Saturday and 12 to 18 on Sunday. 5 races were
held on short Triangle Windward Leeward, Windward courses which kept the racing
very tight. There were 3 races on Saturday and 2 on Sunday. The Richmond Yacht
Club did a great job of running the races and Craig Perez did a super job of
organizing the event.

Race 1

The race was sailed in about 8 knots of wind. Jay Kuncle & Mike Holt Lead the
race for the first triangle. until Mike & Howie got by them on the run. Tight
covering on the short last beat put Mike & Howie across the line first, with
Jay & Mike second, and Matt & Bryan in the Punishment Pony in third.

Race 2

The wind had built to about 12 knots for race two. The Matt & Bryan in Pony
were on fire. punching out to an early lead but were nudged out by Bruce
Heckman & Jeff Miller at the top mark. Bruce & Jeff extended there lead to win
the race. The race for second place was a tight one. at the last weather mark
the Pony rounded second closely followed by Jay & Mike and Mike & Howie. Jay &
Mike Jybed to work the left side downwind this was a bad move. Mike & Howie got
by the Pony on the right side. So the finishes were. Bruce & Jeff, Mike &
Howie, Matt & Bryan, and Jay & Mike.

Race 3

The race was held in 12 to 15 Knots. Uli Coblenz & Danny Thompson started at
the pin and took the lead for the first triangle. Up the next beat. Miller got
past them. At the second weather mark Bruce and Jeff Lead with Uli & Danny ,
and Mike & Howie close behind. Jay and Mike rounded 50 yards back but chose to
reach on the wire down wind. Half way down the leg they were in the lead. At
this point Mike and Howie jumped out on the wire to give it a try. Again it was
a big gainer. At the last leeward mark the top 4 boats were overlapped. the
rounding at the mark was Mike & Howie, Bruce & Jeff, Jay & Mike, and Uli &
Danny. Everyone was covering tight on the last beat, however Jay & Mike picked
up that the boat end was favored at the finished, ducked two boats, and won the
race. Mike & Howie were second, Bruce & Jeff Third, and Uli & Danny fourth.

Sunday

Race 4

We had more wind on Sunday, Race 4 was sailed in 15 to 18 knots of breeze.
Bruce & Jeff flexed their heavy air muscle(and fat) and won the race going
away. After the race Jeff Miller claimed the he was strong enough to hike for
Minutes! at a time. Again Mike & Howie were second, and Jay & Mike third.

Race 5

The wind had dropped off to below 10 knots at the Start. Mike & Howard started
at the pin and pinched off Bruce & Jeff, and Jay & Mike Jay and Mike Tacked off
to the right. and Bruce & Jeff footed off below. By the top mark the wind was
back to 18 knots. Mike & Howie were in front with Matt & Bryan in the Pony in
second. and Bruce & Jeff in third. Mike and Howie pulled away on the reaches to
have a good lead at the leeward mark with Bruce and Jeff in second. Bruce &
Jeff turned on the afterburners on the beat and ground down and passed the
little boys form Long Beach on the beat. At the top mark Bruce and Jeff had a
25 yard lead. With the wind up, both teams jumped out on the wire for the run.
Mike & Howie were able to work lower than the Big Santa Cruz Boys, Jybe inside
of them, passed them, and lead at the leeward mark. A tight tacking dual follow
up the next beat. Jeff & Bruce dispite there efforts could not pass and Mike &
Howie took the race and the regatta.



