Santa Cruz Spring 505 Open

Santa Cruz Yacht Club, home of big waves, cold water, and lots of wind came
into full form over the weekend of April 26-27. Eleven top 505 team duked it
out in every condition from 0-30 knots (all in one race!)

Saturday was a great day with breeze from 15 -25knts, perfect Dave Wahle
reaches and huge waves! The racing was always close with lead changes on most
legs. Race two was very much like race 6 in the 92 worlds! a full 180 in
direction! Then it was back to full force in race 3! Strange but true. At the
end of day one, three teams moved to the front of the pack... Howard
Hamlin/Mike Martin, Mike Holt/David Shelton, and Jeff Miller/Bruce Heckman.

Day two dawned to 25 knts at 7:30 am and a forecast for more in the afternoon!
The first race Jeff and Bruce stayed upright and got the gun followed by Mike
and Dave (2 flips) and Howard and Mike (1 flip). This put the regatta into a
three way tie for first! Other boats going well in the breeze were Perez/Smith
and Moondog/Ruggles. Also of note was Tom Cook and Andy sailing 3246 showing
some transom to the fleet!!! In the last two races the wind was cranking, only
a few boats set on the reaches, and those who did had the ride of there life! I
think the only part of our boat in the water was a bit of rudder! When the
spray had cleared and the boats were righted Mike Holt and David Shelton had
won the regatta, sailing Bruce Edwards' new Rondar and racing together for the
first time! Howard and Mike were 2nd, Miller and Heckman 3rd, Smith and Perez
4th: Ruggles and Moondog 5th.

Thanks to Dave Wahle for letting us send it in the big breeze! Is this the
first time Howard and Mike have lost a regatta? Do the current North American
champs have a weakness? Come to the North Americans and find out for yourself!

David Shelton USA 8616 (Edwards International Racing Team)


