Jim Englert/Thad Melton DOMINATE WRSC 505 Regional, May 24,25


Jim Englert/Thad Melton led at every mark to win the first three races of the
West River Sailing Club 505 Regional, May 24-25. Behind them the rest of the
fleet fought hard for the remaining positions, but no one could touch
Englert/Melton in their new Waterat.

Saturday saw 10-12 knots of wind from 150 degrees, rather than the typical 180
degree Chesapeake sea breeze. A strong tide was running against the wind,
creating some interesting chop in the shallow water of the race course. Though
pressed around the race course, Englert/Melton were never headed. Ali
Meller/Allan Johnson were 2nd to Englert/Melton in the 1st race. Macy
Nelson/Mike Mills were 3rd, brothers Henry and Doug Amthor (Chesapeake Bay Star
Wars and Bermuda Race Week winners) were 4th, and Jonathan Phillips/Monty
Schumpert, racing Jonathan's finally repainted and re-rigged Waterat, 7879,
5th. Englert/Melton led the second race wire to wire. Meller/Johnson were close
behind at the gybe and first leeward marks, but fell to 2nd last when they
swamped the boat while they tried a unique gybe twice while dousing and sailing
by the lee maneuver, a boatlength from the leeward mark, trying to hold off a
fast closing Tim Collins (past 470 North American Champion) and Bill Smith
(Vanguard 15 class president). Collins/Smith were 2nd, (after a DNS in the
first race), Phillips/Schumpert 3rd, Nelson/Mills 4th, Amthor/Amthor 5th, and
Hampton One Design CBYRA High Point champion, and Latane Montague/Robert
Montague 6th.

Englert/Melton won race 3, with Amthor/Amthor pulling through into 2nd,
Collins/Smith 3rd, Nelson/Mills 4th, Phillips/Schumpert 5th and Meller/Johnson
6th. Conditions were shifty and puffy for all three races, with lots of chop
upwind, and downwind legs lengthened considerably by the tide; places changed
around the race course, including the run to the finish (races 1 and 2 were
finished downwind, race 3 had one more windward leg to make an old Olympic
course.

The fleet adjourned to WRSC for an extended social event, followed by some pub
crawling in old town Alexandria.

The forecast Sunday was for a chance of thunderstorms. After persuading the
race committee that the 505s would rather face thunderstorms in the deeper
water of the Bay rather than the shallow water - and shifty winds - of the West
River, the fleet sailed out for races 4 and 5. The breeze was again from 150
degrees for race 4. Phillips/Schumpert led at the windward mark, with
Nelson/Mills and Englert/Melton in pursuit. Nelson/Mills got by
Phillips/Schumpert near the bottom of the first reach. The current took many
teams high of the gybe mark, and in the struggle to get down to the mark,
Meller/Johnson, Amthor/Amthor and Collins/Smith were able to close on the
leaders.. Most of the fleet actually got to the gybe mark at the same time....
Collins/Smith tried to gybe early and cut inside, but Englert/Melton shut the
door on them, so they went on the wrong side of the mark AND hit it.
Meller/Johnson, even further outside, tried the same maneuver and pulled it
off, rounding astern of Collins/Smith and found themselves high of the pack
when Collins/Smith doused and returned to round the mark properly.
Amthor/Amthor rolled Englert/Melton and tried to take Meller/Johnson up, but
were rolled in turn. Halfway down the leg Meller/Johnson rolled
Phillips/Schumpert and then managed to hold them and Amthor/Amthor off as the
pack pumped their way down to the mark. Nelson/Mills led up the 2nd beat, with
Meller/Johnson 2nd and Phillips/Schumpert 3rd.

Nelson/Mills covered Meller/Johnson out to the left side of the beat, looking
for more current and breeze. While those teams closed, Phillips/Johnson went
hard right towards the shore, found the shift they needed, and led at the
weather mark again, with Nelson/Mills 2nd, Meller/Johnson 3rd, Amthor/Amthor
4th and Englert/Melton 5th. All teams chose to do bear away sets for the run to
the finish, except Englert/Melton who gybe set and headed towards shore. First
Meller/Johnson, and then Nelson/Fry gybed to port, leaving Phillips/Schumpert
and Amthor/Amthor heading for the outside corner, and Englert/Melton heading
for the inside. When Englert/Melton gybed back to port, it appeared that they
had everyone, but Meller/Johnson were able to gybe close enough to them to hold
on. On the outside corner, Amthor/Amthor pulled past Phillips/Schumpert, and
then as the 5 teams converged on the finish, Amthor/Amthor were leading, a
couple of boatlengths in front of Phillips/Schumpert... Nelson/Mills luffed
behind Meller/Johnson, as the latter bore off to clear the RC boat end of the
line, establishing an overlap at about one boatlength and calling for room.
This was disputed by Meller/Johnson, who crossed with less than a half a
boatlength lead. Discussions regarding room at the finish line under the new
rules were continued on shore after racing. Englert/Melton, who rounded 5th,
led down the run at one point.. ended up 5th, a boatlength behind Nelson/Mills.

Just as this pack finished, the wind increased and clocked past 180.. The RC
reset the course once the new wind had "stabilized" at 220, with 10-15 knots
off the shore and big puffs. Being the last race, this was the old Olympic
course. Off the start line, Englert/Melton (leeward), Nelson/Mills and
Meller/Johnson (windward) emerged, with the rest of the fleet eventually being
forced to tack for clear air and head inshore. The three leaders drag raced to
the left corner, expecting to get more pressure away from the shore. After
unsuccessfully trying to get Meller/Johnson to tack, Nelson/Mills tacked, and
both Englert/Melton and Meller/Johnson followed suit. A lift put all three
teams on the port layline, well ahead of the others. Englert/Melton were able
to foot down over Nelson/Mills, who were being squeezed up by Meller/Johnson.
Englert/Melton were then able to foot over Meller/Johnson as well, to hold a
narrow lead at the windward mark, with Meller/Johnson 2nd and Nelson/Fry 3rd.
Meller/Johnson rolled Englert/Melton part way down the first reach, and managed
to unhook their spinnaker sheet from over the boom at the gybe mark just in
time to prevent Englert/Melton from rolling them in turn. Positions held up the
beat, and then puffs and shifts down the run rescrambled the fleet, with
Englert/Melton almost getting inside Meller/Johnson at the leeward mark, and
Collins/Smith, Amthor/Amthor and Phillips/Schumpert passing Nelson/Mills.
Meller/Johnson covered Englert/Melton closely to the finish, with Collins/Smith
finishing 3rd, Phillips/Schumpert 4th, Nelson/Mills powering through
Amthor/Amthor upwind for 5th, and Amthor/Amthor 6th.

With the exception of Englert/Melton, who counted 3 1sts and a 2nd, and dropped
a 5th, the final scores were very close. Meller/Johnson won the 12 point tie
breaker over Amthor/Amthor to take 2nd, with Amthors 3rd. Tim Collins/Bill
Smith won the 14 point tie breaker over Phillips/Schumpert to take 4th, with
Phillips/Schumpert 5th. Nelson/Mills were 1 point further back in 6th. Yes
folks, that's 3 points difference between 2nd and 6th! Latane Montague/Robert
Montague were 7th, just two points ahead of Mark Freedman/Phillipe Goubalt in
8th.

A very interesting event. Jim Englert/Thad Melton, the lightest team in the
regatta, were the fastest upwind in breeze, and handled the chop on Saturday
very well too. Meller/Johnson managed to salvage 2nd overall after a
disasterous Saturday, by finishing 3,1 in the Sunday races. Tim Collins/Bill
Smith have completely rerigged Rondar 8060. Almost every piece of wire running
rigging has been replaced with spectra or vectran, including a vectran
forestay; the boat looked great, and was going through the water very well too.
A number of teams had Spiro pole launchers. Latane Montague, sailing with his
cousin, was still figuring out his oak tanked Waterat (ex Englert/Melton, ex
Nelson), but showed signs of developing some speed. Meller/Johnson (Saturday)
and Nelson/Mills (Sunday) were experimenting with a new North mainsail, while
Englert/Melton, Collins/Smith and Amthor/Amthor used Ullman/Danger mains.
Jonathan Phillips' Waterat 7879 is now over ten years old. It was carefully
sanded prior to painting, so may not have gained any weight. Apart from a
little wear on the wooden centerboard case and aft thwart it looked like it
came out of the mould yesterday. It seems as stiff as a new boat. If a boat
looks like new, is down to weight, has not softened, and is well rigged, is it
the same as a new boat? The boat was originally red with the standard issue
Waterat navy grey tanks and foredeck but now has a white hull (lightest) color,
with light grey tanks.

Thanks to Bob and Glenda Bolmquist, Bill Beaver and several other members of
the WRSC International Canoe fleet for doing an excellent job as Race
Committee.
