1997 5o5 (and IC and FD) Midwinter Championship

Another Fantastic Midwinters!

Updated January 13, 1997

Even after twenty four hours of return driving and boat unpacking, I still have
a warm glow from the '97 Midwinters. The St. Pete's Yacht Club pulled off
another outstanding event that everyone: competitors in all three classes, Race
Committee, hangers-on, St. Pete's Yacht club, etc. enjoyed. This is one of the
most enjoyable events I have ever sailed. Regatta chair Nancy Graham, Race
Committee chair Pat Seidenspinner, the Race Committee and the St. Petersburg
Yacht Club are to be congratulated on their continuing success with this event.

The 505 Fleet

This was the third year the 5o5s participated in the event, and the fleet was
the largest yet. We have gone from 12, to 20 and now to 23 boats at the
regatta. With 10 Flying Dutchmen and 11 International Canoes, 5o5s dominated
the event. This year we had people flying in from England (Simon J. Lake flew
in to crew for Peter Mignerey) and Seattle (Alan Johnson sailed with Graham
Alexander); we had Mike Goldstein and Bryan Jerman from the new 505 fleet at
the Indiana University Yacht Club, an increasing contingent from Texas and a
large turnout from West River Sailing Club. We also had teams - or individuals
- from Zimbabwe (well, not directly), Ontario, Rhode Island, Connecticut, Ohio,
Minneapolis, Chicago, Hampton, North Carolina and Florida.

The Depth

The depth in the fleet was excellent, with top New England racer and coach Mike
Zani, two time 505 North American champion and multiple Midwinter champion
Peter Alarie, three time North American champion Macy Nelson, three time
Albacore champion (and top Albacore worlds finisher) Barney Harris, past 5o5
World Champion Ethan Bixby, 1996 East Coast Champions Ali Meller/Allan Johnson,
well known sailing coach - and top 505 sailor - Gary Bodie, past
intercollegiate ace Terry Neff, etc. all racing. The son-and-father team of
Dylan and Mike Breton were racing as were wife-and-husband Carrie and Jeff
Jones. Past Midwinter and East Coast Champion Barry Kuehl was racing his brand
new Rondar, while Chris Museler was racing Parker-hulled Lindsay 6311, over
twenty years old, and looking great after the recent rebuild. Sol Marini and
Chris Coleman chartered George Saunders just-rebuilt Parker 7678. George was
completing the re-rig in the dinghy park so they could race it. The boat looks
terrific with the new wooden centerboard cap and wooden thwarts and the
complete re-rig.

Newcomers

There were a number of newcomers to the 505 class, with Latane Montague/John
Zakaib at their first 505 regatta in composite Waterat 7346, Carrie and Jeff
Jones at their first regatta in Waterat 8011, Lauren Abramson/Tom O'Toole at
their first regatta (this was the first time Lauren and Tom sailed the boat
together!) in Lindsay 6987, Mike Goldstein at not-quite-his-first 505 regatta,
with Bryan Jerman (first time in the 505) in Ballenger 73xx - owned by the
Indiana University Yacht Club, Sol Marini (2nd 505 event)/Chris Coleman (first
time in a 505), and Alan Johnson - the sparkplug behind the restart of the
Seattle 505 fleet - at his first 505 event outside the Northwest. Paul Muus of
Florida has been looking for a good used 505 for sometime, and was crewing for
Barry Kuehl.

The growth in the 505 fleet at the regatta, and the growth and renewed interest
in the 505 were frequent topics of conversation during the event. There were a
number of new faces at the regatta; people who either recently bought a 505, or
were able to charter one for the event. The charters are all now looking for
used 505s to buy. Several SPYC members were very interested in the 505 and are
also looking for suitable used 505s to buy.

The scheduled clinic on the water did not happen, as there was almost no wind
on Thursday. Several onshore seminars were conducted instead, while waiting for
breeze.

Friday

The three fleets spent several hours on the water on Friday, with the 505s
getting a couple of starts - and recalls - in before the very light little
breeze died off and the fleet returned to shore for dinner, videos, draw prizes
and camaraderie. Saturday's races were postponed on shore, but the fleets then
sailed out, only to wait on the water in no wind.... the fleet returned to
shore - and the 505 seminars continued - until some afternoon breeze filled in
allowing the Race Committee to get two races off.

Saturday Race 1

Light air. Mike Zani/Peter Alarie had a good start, and got the jump on the
fleet to lead this race at every mark. Though quite bunched early on, the fleet
spread out during the race. Zani/Alarie were never threatened. Macy Nelson/John
Fry crossed the finish line 2nd, but were PMS. Ali Meller/Allan Johnson worked
their way through to 3rd on the reaches and then fought off Ethan Bixby/Mike
Mills for 2nd, leaving Bixby/Mills 3rd. Jonathan Phillips/Monty Schumpert were
4th, Gary Bodie/Ken Elliott 5th, Barney Harris/Jesse Falsone 6th, and Chris
Museler/Dave Kirkpatrick 7th. This race set a pattern for the rest of the
series. The right was frequently favored, as the stronger breeze near the shore
usually made up for any adverse current. Excellent starts were CRITICAL, as
opportunities to work your way back through during the race were limited.

Race 2

More light air. Another excellent start allowed Zani/Alarie to lead at every
mark. Meller/Johnson were 2nd again, and Bixby/Mills 3rd again, Nelson/Fry 4th,
Barney Harris/Jesse Falsone 5th, Terry Neff/Andrew Cole 6th and Bodie/Elliott
7th. This being a very civilized event, the Race Committee sent the fleet
ashore in time for the 6:00PM social events rather than subjecting us to a
light air race that would have finished in the dark (and delayed dinner).

Sunday Race 3

Nelson/Fry went hard left and lead this one all the way around, with
Bixby/Mills, Zani/Alarie and Phillips/Schumpert close behind. The breeze
lightened up (to precious little) so that the second reach was quite light. The
four leading teams were almost nose to tail for much of the 2nd reach, with
Meller/Johnson closing on the lead pack. The RC shortened the course so that
the race would finish at the top of a shortened second beat. At the leeward
mark, it was Nelson/Fry, Bixby/Mills, Zani/Alarie, Phillips/Schumpert and
Meller/Johnson. A series of covering tacks by the first three allowed Phillips
Schumpert and Meller/Johnson to work right and get close to a puff filling in
from the shore. Nelson/Fry still had the lead, but Phillips/Schumpert pulled up
to 2nd, with Zani/Alarie 3rd, Bixby/Mills 4th and Meller/Johnson 5th. This lead
group worked the right side of the last short beat, tacking on each other
repeatedly. Zani/Alarie passed Phillips/Schumpert, leaving the finishing order
as Nelson/Fry, Zani/Alarie, Phillips/Schumpert, Bixby/Mills and Meller/Johnson.
Museler/Kirkpatrick were 6th and Harris/Falsone 7th.

Race 4

A little more air than Race 3, but still mostly light. Excellent starts gave
Zani/Alarie and Bixby/Mills an early lead, with Bixby/Mills 2nd. Up the last
beat, Bixby/Mills tried to push Meller/Johnson (in 3rd) back and put Terry
Neff/Andy Cole in between them. The three boat tacking duel ultimately got
Neff/Cole past Meller/Johnson, but Meller/Johnson kept tacking, and were able
to drag Bixby/Mills a little to the left, allowing Neff/Cole to go to the
favored right, and pass Bixby/Mills as well. Phillips/Schumpert were 5th,
Museler/Kirkpatrick 6th and Lamb/Jeff Arnold 7th. These results put Zani/Alarie
firmly in the lead, and put Bixby/Mills and Meller/Johnson tied for 2nd.

Race 5

The puff that filled in from the right during race 4 stayed and built, so that
Race 5 started in a little more breeze, and the 505s could occasionally plane
upwind. Nelson/Fry and Bixby/Mills went right early, covering much of the
fleet. Meller/Johnson followed on their weather quarter, with some teams going
deep left. Peter Mignerey/Simon Lake were among the leaders early in this race,
on Meller/Johnson's weather quarter. As the right side leaders got to the
starboard layline and tacked, Meller/Johnson were able to tack above
Bixby/Mills and lee bow Nelson/Fry. Zani/Alarie were not looking good early in
the beat, but found something to the left of the early leaders to get back into
the hunt. At the weather mark it was Meller/Johnson, Nelson/Fry and
Zani/Alarie. The breeze died as the fleet sailed toward the gybe mark away from
the stronger air near the shore. Meller/Johnson opened up slightly as
Nelson/Fry and Zani/Alarie dueled for 2nd. At the gybe mark Zani/Alarie had
pulled through into 2nd. These positions held to the finish, with Nelson/Fry
3rd, Bixby/Mills 4th, Phillips/Schumpert 5th, Harris/Falsone 6th and Neff/Cole
7th.

Race 6

Despite the no-warning-will-be-later-than-2:00PM deadline being close, the RC
was able to get a 6th race in, with the 505s (starting 3rd on Sunday, as
starting order rotated) getting off shortly before the time limit. Conditions
were similar to Race 5, with occasional planing upwind. Having clinched the
series, Zani/Alarie sailed in, along with a couple of other teams that needed
to catch early flights. Bixby/Mills lead early on, with Meller/Johnson in hot
pursuit. Bixby/Mills tacked at about the starboard tack layline, while
Meller/Johnson ducked rather than try a tenuous lee bow. Bixby/Mills were able
to stay high and made the mark in first, while Meller/Johnson footed over boats
on the layline and were within a boat length at the first rounding.
Meller/Johnson stayed a little high and got a slightly quicker set allowing
them to attack. Bixby/Mills countered with a luff, but realizing they were
going to be rolled, sailed lower. The breeze died again as the fleet sailed
towards the gybe mark away from the shore. Meller/Johnson worked their way back
down to the rhumb line, but Bixby/Mills hooked up on their wake and stuck to
them like glue, overlapped to leeward about half the time. With about ten
boatlengths to go, Meller/Johnson were able to break the overlap and rounded
the gybe mark ahead. They held the lead down the 2nd reach, and were then able
to lead Bixby/Mills to the favored right side of the beat, extending their
lead. Bixby/Mills gybe set at the top of the run, giving them a better angle to
the leeward mark, but Meller/Johnson were able to gybe and get back between
Bixby/Mills and the leeward mark. A loose cover up the favored right side of
the last beat gave the race to Meller/Johnson. Bixby/Mills were 2nd, Nelson/Fry
3rd, Phillips/Schumpert 4th, Bodie/Elliott 5th, Museler/Kirkpatrick 6th and
Harris/Falsone 7th.

Overall - Prizes

This gave the series to Zani/Alarie, Mike Zani's first midwinters win, and
Peter Alarie's 4th, with four different skippers. Ali Meller/Allan Johnson were
2nd, Ethan Bixby/Mike Mills ('96 winner) 3rd, Macy Nelson/John Fry 4th,
Jonathan Phillips/Monty Schumpert 5th, Barney Harris/Jesse Falsone 6th, Chris
Museler/Dave Kirkpatrick 7th, Gary Bodie/Ken Elliott 8th, Peter Lamb/Jeff
Arnold 9th, and Terry Neff/Andy Cole 10th. Lauren Abramson/Tom O'Toole were
11th in their first 505 regatta (and the first time they sailed their 505
together), giving Lauren the top female sailor prize. Prizes were awarded to
the top five teams, top female, and 6 packs of beer were presented to all the
newcomers.

There were a number of draw prizes at the Friday and Saturday evening social
events, as well as participation awards - photos of each team on the water -
for every team in the regatta. The 505 class presented Regatta Chair Nancy
Graham with a 505 half hull on a plaque, in appreciation for her efforts in
organizing and running this incredible event. Nancy loved the half model, here
is a quote.

"I am so proud of the Plaque that the 505 Class gave to me and I will cherish
it and the memory of the presentation forever. Thank you for being so
thoughtful and please relay this to all the Class members."

Nancy was running this event annually before the 505s started attending. The
three events we have attended have all been outstanding.

Overall Impressions

Another terrific event for the 505 class (FDs and ICs had a good time too)!
There were so many aspects of this event that were positive. There were a
number of new faces in the 505 class; their enthusiasm for the 505 and the 505
class was clear to see. Every one of the newcomers who did not already have a
505 left saying they were looking for a 505 to buy. Several of the newcomers
commented on how friendly and helpful the 505 class is. The informal seminars,
and the willingness of everyone in the class to answer questions and provide
assistance was mentioned to me several times, as were the six packs of beer for
the newcomers. Indiana University Yacht Club's newest 5o5, Ballenger 73xx, left
the regatta rigged rather better than when it arrived. Mike and Bryan were able
to check out current top 505s and were assisted in modifying the rigging on the
Ballenger. Alan Johnson returns to Seattle knowing a lot more about racing
505s, and with some new ideas for fixing up some of the older Seattle boats and
for promoting the fleet there. It was great to have Simon Lake there, able to
explain some of the current UK ideas on rigging and tuning. Several SPYC
members expressed a strong interest in the 505 and were asking for used boat
recommendations. I was told that five club members were interested in
purchasing 505s.

Mike Zani and Peter Alarie have completely rebuilt and re-rigged Lindsay 7318,
it looks terrific and is clearly going well! Chris Museler's 20+ plus year old
Pressure Drop has been rebuilt and re-rigged as well and is going very well.
George Saunder's rebuild of 7678 leaves the boat much better than when he
bought it, and it looks gorgeous with the wooden centerboard trunk and thwart
tops. Sol and Chris thought the boat was quite quick, and were grateful for the
assistance they received during the event, mentioning the help Mike Zani and
Peter Alarie gave them.

-Ali
