Pacific Northwest Regionals

This past weekend of the 15th and 16th, the 505 regionals were held for those
in the Puget Sound area. Although the area has as many as 36 505s only 6 boats
showed up for the races. The regatta was held in Oak Harbor on Whidbey Island,
and the weather was perfect. The winds were between 12 and 20 knots both days;
the wave action was not too bad with 2 too 3 foot swells.

The competitors consisted of John Dean/Alden Riley; Peter/Alan, Paul
Vongrey/Peter, Sue/Alexis, Doug Jensen/???, and Tim Moser/Jason Clark. Some of
the last names are not present on the results, so you guys know who you are...

Both days had very close racing. In the first race the six boats were split in
two groups. Paul, Tim, and Peter fought for first the whole race and finished
close together, while the others were spaced widely along the course. Paul took
first; Peter second, and Tim third. Tim and Jason could be heard all over the
course with their boom box blasting the music. In the next two races of the
day, Tim took the firsts with Paul chasing him in second, and Peter sweeping in
the thirds. The day ended with a catered diner on the dock; and Paul and Tim
tied for first, with Peter in third.

Sundays racing was that of humor and tactics. The humor first began as Tim and
Jason made a quick trip to Ace to pick up some tell-tails, and returned with
flags. So on the port shroud hung an "I love sailing" flag, and from the
starboard shroud hung the good old "Jolly Roger". The racing conditions were
the same though with a shorter and wider course; this provided two long
reaches. Race one started with all the boats on the line and grouped together.
The boats soon spaced themselves out and left Paul and Tim battling it out in
the front, with Paul leading. However Tim's boat is a bag boat, and therefore
it is easy to rig the spin wrong if one is not paying attention to what they
are doing while rigging the boat... So on the last down wind leg they raise the
chute...sideways. Needless to say it was a Kodak moment. Being the young spunks
we are, we figured "What the hell we might as well leave it up..." So we caught
up to Paul and passed him on the reach to the finish. It became a drag race
between the two after Paul decided he would like to do a different course, and
started beating to the windward mark. Tim took first Paul second, and John Dean
third.

The next race of the day was very close. It was the longest course and the most
disappointing for Tim and Jason. The pair soon took the lead to the weather
mark. But suddenly came to a stand still...literally. Because of the fact our
boat is a bag boat it is very easy to do this.... We lost the spin under the
boat. It had fallen out on the hoist and just stopped us dead in the water. So
while we tried to drag the sail out from in the centerboard trunk, and from
under the boat, we watched all the boats sail on by. Peter took first, Paul
took second and John Dean took third.

The next two races had shorter courses and were a lot more competitive. Despite
their best efforts Tim took second to Paul in the next race; Paul finished
first, Tim second, and John Dean third. The last race of the day was the tie
breaker. All racers were packed together throughout the race. Tim took first,
Peter second and Paul third. It was a close finish with everyone was within
seconds of each other. All together Tim Moser / Jason Clark took first, Paul
Vongrey / Peter took second, and Peter / Alan took third.

I would like to say thank you to all who sponsored this event, and to Paul and
Sue for planing out the regatta. It was very competitive and good sailing, and
hope to see more boats out on the water in the future.

Tim Moser US-6291


