eport, August 19, after 2 Races

The European Championship in  St.Moritz started with two races both with
south eastern wind of 3-4bft and 5bft in the risings. The weather was
clouded just that the famous Maloja Wind was not able to come through.
Nevertheless the sailing was interesting and the crews enjoyed a nice
sailing day.  The first race started at 12.30 hours with 49 505s on the
starting line just in front of Silvaplana. The start took place without
interruption, the Champiomship was opened. Like in Riva the Lake of
Silvaplana has a preferred side. Normally the boats need to head towards
the street. As it was not the normal Maloja several helmsmen tried there
luck on the other side but only one succeeded. De Cerjat/Möckli took the
lead just ahead of Bohren/Fischer and Carveth/Mitchell. The special
coures sent the crews on 4 reaches, each separed by a ton.  The two
leading crews were attacked by Carveth/Mitchell but they managed to
start the second beat in front of the Englishmen. Just at the beginning
of the second race Bohren/Fischer managed to overtake Cerjat/Möckli and
consolidated their lead with an advance of 200m. Carveth/Mitchell and De
Cerjat/Möckli continued their fight while Bohren Fischer just stayed
ahead of them during the whole race. Towards the end the Danish Crew
Saugman Ramsbeck had a fantastic fourth beat and nearly became second.
Just on the finishing line the English were able to beome second and De
Cerjat/Möckli had to take a fourth ranking.  Three hours later the
second race started. The conditions were almost the same. The wind
become a bit more changeable. Again the regatta was started without any
problems. Several crews again tried their first beat on the "wrong" side
and this time nobody succeeded to join in to the crews who opted for the
street. The first beat was difficult because the conditions changed form
one minute to the other. After the reach about 10 crews were clearly
leading ahead of the rest. After the second beat the Swiss
Bohren/Fischer took the lead but were immediately overtaken by another
Swiss Plüss/Dürr and the Germans Scheder/Stammerjohan. Fourth was
another Swiss Renker/Wernli. The first two boats fighted the whole rest
of the race for the lead, seeing mostly Plüss/Dürr in front. In the end
the fast Germans overtook the Swiss Boat and won the second regatta.
Bohren/Fischer stayed third and became the first leader of the European
championship.  

Roger Fischer


Report, August 20, after 4 Races


Silvaplana- Switzerland, 20Th August 1996.

For the second day the wind had a meeting with the participants of the
1996 European Championship of the 505's class. The Maloja local thermic
wind was renforced by a laminar South-West wind  reaching 4 to 6 on the
Beaufort graduation. The size of the lake  obliges the comitee of the
St. Moritz Yacht Club to place a special  kind of course having 4 reach
legs. The races were of the most physical you can find. The line start
was used at the place of the standard gate start. 

The first race of the day was won  by the Danish crew Damsgaard-Overbeck
(DEN 8620) just in front of the only competitive English crew Carveth
- Mitchell (GBR 8464) and the Germans Scheder- Beschin/Stammerjohan
(GER8550). The favorite Swiss crew Bohren - Fisher (SUI 8441) was within
the fleet after having two times capsized and finished 7th.

The second race was closely won by the Swiss crew Betschen - Jacot (SUI
8569). After leading by 400 meters, they were catched up  by
Bohren-Fischer. Then Bohren-Fisher had a damage of the jib sheet and
finished second. Damsgaard-Overbeck  finished 3rd and Carveth - Mitchell
finished 4th. 

To finish this day report I ask you to excuse my English level and
I wish you to have as much wind and competition than we have at
Silvaplana lake.

Philippe Jacot.

Report, August 21, after 6 Races

Markus Bohren / Roger Fischer (SUI 8441) European Champion after the 6th
race

Two races took place today on the Silvaplana lake. One more as initially
forseen, but due to the incertain weather forcast till the end week, the
racing comittee took the above mentioned decision in acordance with the
participants. 

Today, the famous Maloja wind was reenforced by a liminar south-west
wind (i.e. 4-5 Bft) under a cloudy sky which is effectively a bad sign
for the remaining championship days.

The first race was easily won by the two new european champions which
were really intouchable by these meteorological conditions. In the first
taday's event, they had a clear start and win race. The other
competitors were fighting for the second place.  Between them,
Filimonow/Stöckmann succeeded  in beating the positively agressive
British Carveth/Mitchell followed by the Swiss de Cerjat/Moeckli and the
two danish boats, Damsgaard/Overbeck and Christiansen/Langendorf.

Later in the afternoon, the wind reeinforced by 1 Bft. Surprinsigly
Marti/Waser (SUI 8449) were incontinously in touch with Bohren/Fisher.
Only during the last upwind, Bohren/Fisher took a advange of 50 meters,
controling their opponents, which gave them the european title. Behind,
de Cerjat/Moeckli finished 3rd in front of the two Dans
Damsgaard/Overbeck and Saugman/Ramsbek. The British Carveth/Mitchell,
2nd in the general classement completed the race at a desappointing 21st
place.

 François Moeckli

 Race 7 is scheduled for Thursday,  August 22, 1996, 12 hrs Swiss time


 Final Report, August 22, after 7 Races

 Thursday was a very cloudy and in the morning rainy weather without
 wind. At two o'clock a light  wind started from direction south with
 a strength of about 2 bft. So the commitee decided to try a race.  The
 first start was a general recall and also at the second start many
 boats were over the line in the last three minutes; 9 boats were
 disqalified.  The new European Champions Markus Bohren and Roger
 Fischer from Switzerland didn't have to start anymore, they just went
 sailing for the crew from the Swiss TV to take some pictures! (For
 those who can get the Swiss TV: Sunday 25. August, Sport am
 Wochenende!) In this race the ranking list looked a bit different to
 the other days.  At the first mark the "light wind specialist"
 Gorremans/Gorremans from Begium were leading in front of Renker/Wernli
 from Switzerland. On the last upwind course they were cought by
 Filimonov/Stöckmann (GER) who won the raceChristiansen/Langendorf (DEN)
 on the second place. Thrid were Damsgaard/Overbeck (DEN) who with this
 result became second in the overall classement. With their 16 th place
 in the last race, the British crew Carveth/Mitchell finished third.

 Dominik Haitz


