https://usa505.org/stuart-sinclair-regatta-report/
Stuart Sinclair Regatta Report
By Jon Henderson July 5, 2013


The Stuart Sinclair Regatta is THE BEST REGATTA OF THE YEAR

I look forward to this regatta every year for many reasons.  First of
all Stuart Sinclair leaves a legacy of Awesome!  R.I.P. good friend.

Arriving in Port Townsend late on Friday night we were welcomed by our
wonderful hosts in Port Townsend.  Mats Elf and I were treated to
a freshly baked cake and ukelele (thank you Juniper) at “Chez Dunlap”.

Saturday morning we were greeted with beautiful weather and a nice 5-10
knot breeze.  Mats and I continued to work on the final details of the
new mast at the Wooden Boat Facility at Point Hudson and just barely
made the first race.  Great day of tight racing.  Our Canadian friends
Brian and Evan won race two.

Six races were accomplished by a fantastic volunteer race committee with
eleven boats of every vintage and experience.  Really good to have the
new faces in the fleet.  Welcome to Bob Conrad and his son Chris.
Another new member of our fleet is opti sailor Alex Hubbard sailing with
his dad Chris.   After racing that evening, the Port Townsend fleet
treated everyone to a delicious lasagna feast, and a race de-briefing
emceed by 505 fleet stalwart Paul Von Grey.  I think everyone gained
some knowledge.   Many of us also made a point to support the local Port
Townsend economy with late night techno dancing at Sirens, as it was
Prom night at the sailing center.

Sunday was again spectacular weather with very challenging racing
conditions for the final 3 races.  Very fun sailing with lots of lead
changes and mixed results.  Simon Miles and Sean Rankins won race eight
with a personal puff, and the last race of the regatta was won by less
than a foot!  With such great conditions out by Point Hudson, the fleet
went on to practice a couple of rabbit starts that are unique to the
international level of racing in the 505 class.

Results are located at :  http://pths.dyndns.org/505/

Big Thanks to the Port Townsend Sailing Association, and everyone who
attended this epic event.  Ten boats, nine races, awesome people.  Can’t
wait to do it again!

I look forward to seeing everyone at the next couple of upcoming events:

