1996 Inland National Championships

Grafham Water SC

13th-14th April 1996

Held at Grafham Water on the 13th and 14th of April the 505s enjoyed a good
turnout of 55 boats considering it clashed with the World Championships in
Australia. The first race got underway in an easterly force 2/3 and Hector
Cisneros/Lawerence Crispin broke free and powered away from the fleet with
startling boatspeed and condition management. Robin Boardman/Ian Godfrey coming
second.

The second race saw similar conditions with Hector and Lawerence finishing 3rd
to Ian Pinnell/Mark Darling. In second place was Chris Howarth/Stuart Aston
impressively in a 10 year old boat. Overnight leaders were Hector and Lawerence
but with a tight pack in the top 6 places there was little room for error the
next day.

Courteously the fog blew away just in time for the 10 am start on the Sunday in
a shifty 2/3 and more than ever the positioning and speed in the first 200
yards sealed the fate for the rest of the race. All stops were pulled out by
the first three boats with the championship in their sights and Ian Pinnell≈ês
bow crossed the line first with Hector and Lawerence second and Chris
Howarth/Stuart Aston now a very close contender coming third.

The final race and with the marginal trapeezing wind flicking hither and
thither left many puzzled as the wiley and the lucky got ahead. Chris Howarth
took the lead and the race with Richard Tew and Simon Hiscocks coming second.
Ian Pinnell/Mark Darling came third to take the champoinship - Hector and
Lawerence having to grind thier way with stoic determination up from a thirties
position after a poor start to tenth place; this left them 3rd Overall and
Chris Howarth/Stuart Aston second.

The event was run with to the very high standard that the 505s have always had
at Grafham and many sponsors flooded the field with prizes. Our overall fleet
sponsor for the year is Ronstan whose resources we are pouring into training
(next session 4/5 May at Stokes Bay) and event enhancement. We would like to
thank everyone who contributed.


