Day 1

8th September 1996

Report: Ian Barker, Bill Masterman, Daniel Cripps, Alexander Meller, Simon Lake

Race 1 was started on time by the Hayling Island Sailing Club Race Committee in
a ten knot NE breeze. Seventy 505s were registered, and all started the race.
The breeze was oscillating before the start. GBR 8072, Tim Bird/Arthur George
were the pathfinder. The first shift favored the early gaters, who were able to
tack and cross most of the fleet. At the first windward mark, Ian Pinnell/Mark
Darling led, with Jeremy Robinson/Bill Masterman 2nd, Ian Barker/Dan Cripps
3rd, overlapped with Alexander Meller/Allan Johnson (from North America) close
behind in 4th.

Leading positions were unchanged around the first triangle. Ian Pinnel/Mark
Darling hung on to the lead at the second windward mark, with the North
American vistors having pulled through into second, and biting at his heels.
Down the run, the Robinson/Masterman team showed superior speed and blitzed
into the lead at the leeward mark, with Pinnell now demoted to second place,
Meller/Johnson 3rd, and Barker/Cripps close behind in 4th.

A major windshift gusting from the right caused havoc, as several teams who
manged to get to the right at the proper time gained considerable distance and
places, while some of the early leaders faltered. At the windward mark,
Robinson/Masterman led, with Barker/Cripps up to 2nd, Pinnell/Darling 3rd,
Vernon Ralston/Simon Spratt 4th, Meller/Johnson down to 5th, barely leading
Ebbe Rosen/Olle Wenrup from Sweden, with several other teams very close behind.

Despite the gybe mark having being moved and a course change announced by the
Race Committee, the reach was still a run, with teams gybing to try to catch
the puffs coming through. Robinson/Masterman led at the gybe mark, after a
gybing duel down the leg with Barker/Cripps, who were just behind. With the
course change, the location of the leeward mark was not immediately apparent,
and the leaders held their spinnakers at the "gybe" mark. Barker/Cripps were
the first to drop their kite, while Colin Goodman/Jim Turner (fresh from their
win at the Fireball Worlds) were the first to douse before rounding the mark,
leaving them highest for the very close reach into the leeward mark. Those who
did not drop immediately were left too low, and were overhauled by those who
dropped early.

At the last leeward mark, Barker/Cripps led by 100 yards from Ralston/Spratt,
with Robinson/Masterman 3rd, Pinnell/Darling 4th, and a pack of boats close
behind. The wind by this stage had increased to 18 knots, and the 505s were
planing fast up the final beat. The wind was steady at the new direction - 60
degrees off from what it had been, and Barker/Cripps maintained their lead, and
finished first. Robinson/Masterman were able to grind down Ralston/Spratt
passing them just before the finish line. Pinnell/Darling were 4th. Phillipe
Boite/Pierre Jean Gallo (current and 15 time French 505 Chamption) moved
steadily through the fleet to finish 5th.


Day 2

9th September 1996

Report: Ian Barker, Bill Masterman, Daniel Cripps, Alexander Meller, Simon Lake

After 2 recalls the second race started at 12:30 pm in 20 knot NE wind. Ian
Barker/Daniel Cripps, Jeremy Robinson/Bill Masterman, Ian Pinnell/Mark Darling
and Geoff Carveth/Ian Mitchell dominated the first beat. Robinson/Masterman
went furthest right and picked up a favourable shift to lead by 100 yards
followed by Barker/Cripps and Pinnell/Darling.

Robinson/Masterman increased their lead to 300 yards on the first reach but
were then hit by a large gust and had to drop their spinnaker, the wind then
dropped and they had to re-hoist. During this Barker/Cripps and Pinnell Darling
closed to about 50 Yards. Robinson/Masterman made a wide rounding of the gybe
mark whilst Barker/Cripps and Pinnell/Darling rounded tightly and all picked up
a big gust. Robinson/Masterman dropped half way down the second reach,
Barker/Cripps held longer and were able to take the lead at the leeward mark
followed by Robinson/Masterman and Pinnell/Darling.

The leading three had a close tactical battle up the second beat , the order
maintained to the windward mark. On the run, Barker/Cripps gybe set and
trapezed to the left hand corner of the run and Robinson/Masterman and
Pinnell/Darling went to the right hand corner. Barker/Cripps increased their
led at the leeward mark by 100 yards followed by Robinson/Masterman and
Pinnell/Darling.

The third beat was the windiest of the race with gusts reaching 25 knots,
Barker/Cripps extended their lead over Robinson/Masterman and Pinnell/Darling
fell back towards a pack of 5 boats chasing hard.

The leading three place remained the same over the final triangle with
Barker/Cripps winning by about 2 minutes from Robinson/Masterman 2nd and
Pinnell/Darling 3rd. Hector Cisneros/Lawrence Crispin went hard left up the
final beat to overhaul four boats and finish 4th followed by two club mates,
Robert Lark/Neil Fulcher 5th and Ian Montague/Geoff Kimber 6th.


Day 3

10th September 1996

Report: Martin Hodgson, Robert Larke and Simon Lake.

Race was started on time by the Hayling Island Sailing Club Race Committee in a
eight knot northerly breeze. The breeze was oscillating before and during the
race, both in strength and direction.

Early to middle starters were favoured initially, and the leaders worked their
way up the middle of the beat playing the shifts, at the first mark Robert
Larke/Neil Fulcher held a two boat lead from Greg Sergant/Nigel Vooght 2nd with
Martin Hodgson/Paul Beasley 3rd, Clive Robinson/Gary Cawthorn 4th, Mike
Holt/Ian Godfrey 5th and Rob Napier/Kimball 6th. All rounded within 50 yards of
each other.

On the fist reach Larke/Fulcher pulled out a 50 yard lead, Hodgson/Beasley and
Robinson/Cawthorn climbed high and passed Sergant/Vooght who were 4th at the
first gybe mark, with Holt/Godfrey 5th and Richard Tew/Simon Hiscocks 6th. On
the second reach Larke/Fulcher went for the leeward mark but Hodgson/Beasley
and Sergant/Vooght went high and found good breeze which allowed them to
overtake Larke/Fulcher. The positions at the leeward mark were Hodgson/Beasley
1st, Sergant/Vooght 2nd, Larke/Fulcher 3rd , Holt/Godfrey 4th, Tew/Hiscocks 5th
and Jeremy Robinson/Bill Masterman 6th.

On the second beat the leading group played the shifts in the middle of the
beat, but Napier/Kimball who had been 7th went hard left and took the lead. Ian
Barker/Daniel Cripps moved from 10th to 5th. The order at the second winward
mark was Napier/Kimball 1st, were Hodgson/Beasley 2nd, Sergant/Vooght 3rd,
Holt/ Godfrey 4th, Barker/Cripps 5th and Robinson/Cawthorn 6th. Early leaders
Larke/Fulcher had dropped to 8th by now.

On the run Napier/Kimball and Hodgson/Beasley gybe set and went down the left
hand side of the run. Gybing half way down Hodgson/Beasley were able to sail
lower than Napier/Kimball and look the lead. Robinson/Masterman went hard left
on the run and moved from 9th at the windward mark to 3rd at the leeward,
Sergant/Vooght 4th, Holt/Godfrey 5th and Philippe Boite/Pierre Jean Gallo
(France) 6th.

On the third beat Napier/Kimball again went left with Hodgson/Beasley playing
the shifts up the middle, left paid again and Napier/Kimball regained the lead.
Positions at the windward mark were Napier/Kimball 1st, Hodgson/Beasley 2nd,
Holt/Godfrey 3rd, Robinson/Masterman 4th, Boite/Gallo 5th and Robinson/Cawthorn
6th.

On the first reach of the second triangle Hodgson/Beasley sailed over
Napier/Kimball and Robinson/Masterman passed Holt/Godfrey, these positions were
maintained through the second reach and round the leeward mark the order was
Hodgson/Beasley 1st, Napier/Kimball 2nd, Robinson/Masterman 3rd, Holt/Godfrey
4th, Boite/Gallo 5th and Robinson/Cawthorn 6th.

On the final beat Napier/Kimball went left for the third beat in sucession,
Hodgson/Beasley loosly covered them playing the shifts on the left,
Robinson/Masterman went furter right, and gained the lead just bfore the
finish, however Hodgson/Beasley reclamed the lead and finished 1st, followed by
Robinson/Masterman, Napier/Kimball 3rd, Holt/Godfrey 4th, Boite/Gallo 5th and
Barker/Cripps 6th.

Day 5

12th September 1996

Report: Simon Lake.

Following the posponment of yesterdays race - The Race of the Year - two races
were scheduled for today, Races 5 and 6. This allows the The Race of the Year
to be sailed on Friday, September 13th.

Race 5 was started in about 12 knots of wind which steadily increased to about
25 knots during the race. After a wait of about one hour Race 6 started in
about 15 knots which increased to 20 knots at times.

Jeremy Robinson and Bill Masterman won both races to retain the British
National Championships with a race to spare counting 2,2,2,1 and 1. Ian Barker
and Daniel Cripps were 7th and 2nd today which assures them of second place
overall. Third place is wide open with Geoff Carveth and Ian Mitchell having 24
points and Ian Pinnell and Mark Darling on 25 points.

Day 6

13th September 1996

Report: Simon Lake.

Race of the Year

The 1996 International 505 British National Championships concluded on Friday
13th September with Race 4, The Race of the Year. An extra round is scheduled
making this race particularly long, for the leaders Race 4 was 2 hours 40
minutes.

Race 4 was started on time in Hayling bay East, all other races having been
sailed in the West bay, with winds of 18 knots shifting from NE to N. This
presented new tidal and wind challenges for the rather depeleted start of 50
boats.

A small shift during the start favoured middle starters, but half way up the
first beat the wind backed allowing early starters to recover their position.
Robert Larke/Neil Fulcher led at the winward mark. A wind shift and gust when
the early leaders had rounded the gybe mark caused the chasing pack to compress
and arrive three or four deep. The second reach was very tight and most were
only able to carry their spinnakers for part of the reach.

By the next winward mark Ian Pinnell/Mark Darling had taken the lead to move
into third place in the championships. Geoff Carveth/Ian Mitchell went hard
left down the first run and made a substiantial gain on Pinnell/Darling by the
leeward mark.

A couple of extra tacks, arising from Pinnell/Darling underestimating the
strength of the tide, allowed Carveth/Mitchell to gain the lead and take third
place in the championships from Pinnell/Darling.

Carveth/Mitchell extended their lead to the finish, by which time Hector
Cisneros/Lawrence Crispin had caught and overhauled Pinnell/Darling.
