Southern Area Championships
Stokes Bay, 8/9 May 1999


A fresh 20-25 knot wind greeted the 36 505's to Stokes Bay for their
Southern Area Championships. For most sailors this was the first
occasion in '99 that they had sailed in a real wind and it quickly
because clear that many were going to struggle with the conditions.

Three races were scheduled for Saturday and Terry Scutcher and Simon
Lake proved quick out of the gate to lead the first race from start to
finish. This was despite being pushed hard by Ian Pinnell and Simon
Payne.

Race two saw Ian Pinnell and Nick Powell take the gun with Simon Payne
and Bill Masterman taking second and Terry Scutcher taking third. Many
were hoping that the third race would be hold over to Sunday as aching
limbs started to take their toll. However the race went ahead as
scheduled and mark Upton-Brown proved that he had recovered from his
earlier swimming in race one to take the first place. Despite an earlier
forecast, suggesting more wind on Sunday, the fleet was greeted with
a near perfect 15 knots of breeze. Ian Pinnell and Nick Powell won races
four and five, which was enough to give them first overall without
having to sail the final race. With out Ian Pinnell Simon Payne won the
final race with new boys to the fleet, Steve Nicholson and John Mildred
having their best result of the season in second place.

Packing the boats away took quite a time as many of the fleet now head
off to Lake Garda for a Europa Cup event. Although it is difficult to
imagine how the racing could be better from Stokes Bay.
