http://hem.passagen.se/waterat/505worlds78.htm


1978 International 505 World Championship, Copenhagen
Report by Dennis Surtees
President International 505 Class Racing Association

The place:

Skovshoved Sejlklub, Gentofte is a few kilometers north of Copenhagen on
a well-equipped, well-used Marina with a friendly club, good restaurant,
and hard-working club members. The Danish 505 Association, the city, the
club and it's members and sponsors combined put on a memorable and
exciting championship. Under Tage Schack, the organization was smooth
and efficient. The local fleet, with the help of the International Rules
Committee, handled the measurement expeditiously. More hulls were
measured by Ted May than ever before. More of them were sent away either
permanently or to return corrected. A tent city sprang up at one end of
the harbour and a container city at the other. Local hotels, boarding
houses and private homes quickly filled with 505ers and we were ready to
race.

Glenfiddich sponsored a moving little opening ceremony at which the
National flags were raised and much Glenfiddich was lowered. Not the
least of the latter was the half-tumbler full that the French thought
that Derek and I should chug-a-lug! I am told that we made a pretty
sight as we wandered arm in arm down Hellerup main road. It is a credit
to the Whiskey that we felt no special ill-effects the next day, or are
we just so hardened to it?

The racing:

From my somewhat unimpressive place in the fleet I cannot give you
a blow-by-blow of the action up front. Perhaps you will find it
elsewhere. Perhaps equally fun to read would be a few of the observed
highlights.

The weather remained force 3 to 5 through the first four races, with
lumpy seas. As the days progressed the wind tended to go clock-wise but
within each race there were many shifts whose predictability can be
attested to only by the leaders. Most of us found wind (and current)
capricious, judging from the quality of the helmsmen that found
themselves in the middle (or muddle) of the fleet at the first mark. The
first start was notable for the number of 5-ohs that tried to sink the
gate boat despite dire warnings of the consequences. The ultimate
culprit was found in the boatpark later after many "who-me"s or "I
wasn't anywhere near that end"s. After the one DSQ the gates returned to
the even tenor of their predicted ways.

West Coast, USA types were elated to see Jim Warfield and John Gilmore
first with Brauch and Beck second the first day. Jim, unknown to many
outside the USA, has been a very successful helmsman for years back
home. It was no accident but the championship was to be nobody walkover.
Peter Colclough and Terry Kyrwood fought out the second race with
Kyrwood finishing the winner and Peter second. Colclough came back to
win the third race while the fourth went to our host country with a win
by the Bojsen-Moller brothers. At this stage, with one throwout, the
Bojsen-Mollers led overall with Colclough second. The equilateral
(60-60-60) triangle had been working well. The reaches were mostly
difficult three sail legs but there were times when two sails were
faster (and easier) than three. Frequently it was necessary to raise or
drop the spinnaker during the leg revealing all too well the level of
training of the various teams. The small flat spinnakers seem to shine
in these conditions. No one type of boat dominated. Kyrwoods, Parkers,
Lindsays and other one-offs had similar pace. It truly appeared to be
a test of crew skills. The Bojsen-Moller boat might have been
exceptional. Paul Elvstrom watching most days, felt that their boat had
a speed edge. It was one of the original Kyrwood hulls from La Rochelle,
with a carbon-fibered Alpha Minus mast.

The fifth and sixth days were wiped out by excessive winds. The loss of
the fifth day was taken well by most crews after the huge beer tasting,
dinner and dance given by Tuborg on the fourth night. No doubt the
record quantities of beer (according to Tuborg) consumed that night were
responsible for the relieved looks on the overhung faces in the dinghy
park!

The loss of the sixth race was a different matter. The banquet was that
day. After much agonizing, we decided to hold the fifth race on the
spare day so the trophy banquet became a banquet without trophies! It
was non-the-less, very enjoyable.

My boat had disappeared on a ferry that morning. I was leaving early
myself until I saw that Jim Warfield was in the lead and the black lines
of cloud that were developing. Four boats could win on paper:Colclough,
Bojsen-Moller, Kyrwood and Warfield. At first, Colclough and Moller were
"in the tank". Could Warfield hang on to win? Could Colclough recover so
many places? The lead changed hands several times as line squalls
decimated the fleet. Edward Owens led for a long time until he was slow
to take down his kite in a squall. Kyrwood, too, held the lead (and the
whole championship) until he was bowled over by a huge gust. Brauch took
over the lead only to see his mast collapse under the strain. Steve
Taylor won that day but Kyrwood's capsize had cost him the championship
because Peter Colclough was, indeed, doing his accustomed climb through
the fleet. Boats appeared to disappear in front of him as on succesive
roundings he went from 20th to 12th to 7th and finally third. He was one
of the few not to capsize that day. He truly did a champion's job in
coming through to win his third championship in a row. We thought that
his wife Sue was going to have a heart attack as she listened to the
results round by round.

Meanwhile, I'd got so excited that I forgot all my plans for an early
departure for the ferry. Rob Napier and I sat there counting the scores
as we bewailed the conditions that thrill us most.

Throughout the racing the committee showed excellent judgement in moving
either the weather or reaching marks, depending on wind strength and
directon. The competitors did not appreciate, however, the siting of the
course on the first day over the Copenhagen sewer outfall! On seeing the
broad brown slick on the water, I asked Roy Parker "What the hell is
that?" He replied: "It looks like it. It smells like it. I'm pretty sure
that I know just what it is!" He was right. Sally Lindsay insisted that
it was faster to sail in it than out but her stomach is stronger than
mine. On one occasion when a big header caused me to turn back into it,
all I got from my crew was a laconic "thanks".

Boats and Equipment

Last year at La Rochelle, each of the first four boats was at minimum
weight. We took that lesson to heart. This year, minimum weight was the
rule not the exception. This applied to all builders. It seems so
obviously possible to be below minimum using modern methods that the
class will find it necessary to weigh more stringently in future,
perhaps both all-up AND and stripped, or checks on the leaders of each
race as in Australia in 76.

The Parker, Kyrwood and Lindsay seemed equally fast. My impression of my
borrowed Rondar was that it, too, was as good as any. It appears to have
recovered that great turn of down-wind speed of yore. The Kyrwood and
Parker balsa shells are heavier than before but they make up for it with
lighter deck and tank construction. Even boats that are 2 to 3 kilos
over on the hull can get to minimum all-up using good rudder and
centerboard construction. The question will be "How long will these
light hulls last?" For this reason, it seems wise for our class to
continue to allow experimentation with new materials. At the recent Star
World Championships, I talked to Buddy Melges about their problems with
restriction of materials. At the moment, our most expensive boats are
the wooden ones. We need a production boat in modern synthetic materials
that will be long-lived under the terrific rig tension that we are
using. The Star builders have abondened wood techniques but struggle
under their materials limitations. Buddy thinks that our rules should
allow us to build boats that will last forever! His personal opinion is
that a balsa core in a sandwich of the new woven rovings of glass carbon
and/or Kevlar vacuum-bagged into a rigid panel will produce a strong
boat that is lighter than anything that we have seen. Melges has made
these ideas work and has been a World or Olympic champion in Stars,
Slings and Scows.

Masts:

Apart from Bojsen-Moller's Alpha Minus, the Proctor D continues to be
the commonest section. The "carbonized" Alpha Minus raised our eyebrows.
It was certainly on a fast boat but whether it was the cause of that
must be confirmed. Schaeffer booms are very light and stiff but need
very careful fitting out.  Jeff Brauch had a carbon fiber spinnaker pole
with all the fittings epoxied on. It was not lighter but much stiffer
than other poles.

Centerboards:

The Kyrwoods stick to the non-jibing, conventional eliptical shape with
laminar flow sections as advocated by Frank Bethwaite. This contrasts to
the high aspect ratio boards with the so-called "continuous leading
edge" on the best European 505s. The U.S.  boats mostly used jibing,
high-aspect ratio boards by Mark Lindsay. There has been much
speculation whether the better performance of the Kyrwood boats in heavy
air is related to their different hull shape. Now that all the best
boats are light and have stiff panel construction, it is quite possible
that the difference in centerboards is the primary factor in different
performance. In this regard, it is important to note that Terry
Kyrwood's boat had been altered to class tolerances. It no longer has
the magic narrowness at station 6, as did the Bojsen-Moller boat. I have
been using the Australian style of board all year but used a large,
long, jibing board at the Worlds. I was made very aware of the changes
in sailing characteristics that this causes. This is not, after all,
a very new concept but new boat owners should think as much about the
area and shape of their board related to their weight as they do about
the fullness of their sails. Whether you get a rocking (jibing) board or
not relates to your style of sailing and the water smoothness. A rocking
board may work much better if you are a "pincher" (variously also called
stuffers or screwers in the English vernacular) than if you are
a "driver" and certainly better in smooth water.

Sails:

Colclough used Mustos again, moderately full jib and main with
considerable luff curve. Moller's sails were Elvstroms; they certainly
fitted their bendy Alpha to perfection. Kyrwood had a flat Burke main on
a stiff mast. The Australians, in general, used flatter mains than most
except the Banks and, I think, the Norths on Taylor's boat. Warfield,
fifth, had his own De Witt sails and thought that he did not develop his
speed until he went to flat sails. Are we seeing yet another cycle
caused by the need to point out of the "Gate" starts?

The "shy 'chute" seems to be here to stay, at least until we get
a course change at the World Chaimpionship. The Australian section can
take pride in the introduction of yet another class revolution.

Equipment:

Many manufacturers are copying, the Harken roller blocks but the Harken
"Cammatic" cleat is in a class of it's own (all be it, a rather
expensive one. The U.S. boats showed the most adjustables but their low
weights allowed for it. In general, mos boats are going for simplicity
with fixed shrouds or simple shroud Highfield levers with adjustable
forestays to compress bend into the mast. Almost every boat sheets the
jib to the inside edge of the tanks now. A few, including Brauch and
Warfield, each quite fast in a breeze, can pull the jib fairleads
outboard. Spinnaker fairleads are being moved forward for the smaller
spinnakers and, finally, stripes are definitely considered fast now.
