Western Australian State Championships February 6th, 7th, 13th, & 14th February 1999 

 The WA 505 State Championships were held over the last two weekends at
Freemantle Sailing Club. The first weekend was light and all six races were won
by Scott Olsen and his new crew, Clay Cook. Matthew Hansen was secure in second
place with five 2nds and a 4th. A tight bunch of boats including Mark Stowell
in Project, Anthony Gaunt in SOTS, Ross Brennan in Dash and Stewart Campbell in
Hot Persuit were locked in battle for third place with only a couple of points
separating them. The remaining four boats were a little off the pace although
each showed flashes of form at times. The final three races were scheduled for
the following Saturday and an eager fleet of ten headed out into what seemed a
brisk but not unreasonable sea breeze. Once again Scott led at the first mark
by a narrow margin from the heavy air specialists Mark Stowell and Darryl
Bentley in Project. The wind was rapidly increasing in strength and what
followed was carnage. The whole fleet was capsized at various points along the
first reach as the wind rose to a peak of 38 knots. Scott Olsen split his
mainsail as did Ross Brennan. Nick Hancock in Hoochie Coochie Man snapped his
mast, Marcos Vivian blew a hole in his jib. Yours truly was feeling reasonably
happy about all this as Cosmic Hippo Blasted down the first reach until the
tiller went uncomfortably light as the rudder blade snapped off at the
waterline. Four lonely souls limped round the course as the wounded were towed
in by the harassed (and seasick) rescue teams. Project won from SOTS and Hot
persuit. The remaining races were abandoned due to the conditions.

