Fish River Dam Regatta

With the weather forcasters predicting rain all weekend, I was not looking
forward to going to the Fish River Dam Regatta. Peter Holden my regular crew
was unavailable to make the trip, so Michael Page offered to sail with me for
the weekend. Michael thought it would be a good idea to tow the boat with his
works van, which could double as sleeping quarters for Saturday night.

The dam is located near the country town of Oberon, just 2 3/4 hours drive from
Sydney. As we drove out of the city and over the Blue Mountains the rain slowly
disappeared. Having never been to the dam, I was pleasantly surprised on our
arrival. It is located in a natural valley with sweeping hills all around. The
water's edge is dotted with large grey-green bush rocks, trees and long brown
grasses. On the north side is the Oberon golf course, where the entrance to the
Club and rigging area is situated. The view from the top is just stunning,
looking out over the large 'S' shaped reservoir. As you drive into the golf
course area you thread your way down a winding dirt track, through the second
and third fairways. At the bottom, a sharp left turn takes you along the
water's edge to the club area. By the time we pulled up at the club the skies
had cleared but we were running a little late for the first race. While I went
to the Club to enter, Michael was left to ponder on how to put the boat
together. On my way back to the boat after completing the formalities, the OD
suggested that as we were running late they would delay the start until we were
ready. What a relaxing weekend this was going to be! A quick rig, a change of
clothes and we were ready to go sailing.


The format for the weekend was two races on Saturday and two on Sunday. There
were two divisions, one with approximately 30 catamarans, and the other with
mono hulls comprising four 505's, a sharpie, a mirror, a laser and a small
assortment of other boats. A short briefing was held before the start to
explain the marks to be used, and all the do's and don'ts of the dam.

The water is used for domestic use, i.e. drinking etc, so there is no swimming,
windsurfing, waterskiing, or fishing in boats allowed. Also, you must leave the
shore in just enough time to make the start, and when you finish, return to
shore as soon as possible. I can understand the need to protect this area of
water and the environment as it is such a beautiful spot. Sailors need to look
after these areas, as there are not many places to sail in the country.

The first race started at 11.30 a.m. with 28c temperature and a light westerly
0 to 4 knots. The shoreline of the dam is made up of many small bays, and being
inland, there were small pockets of thermals close to shore. Life was made a
little easier with the dam being quite deep in most places at the water's edge,
so the secret was to sail to the shore and bounce from one thermal to another.

After two hours of racing and a shortened course, it was back to shore for a
steak sandwich, beer, and a glass or two of red wine. Michael and I had got the
gun, from Sam Cronin and Brad, with Nick Stabback and Ian Dunn third. Fourth
were the Kruger Boys in Filthy Florrie (the boat), which was given to them for
the weekend by Bill Edwards. One of the fascinating things that happened during
our time on the water was the huge number of trout jumping for food. We saw at
least 25 to 30 fish of at least 30 to 40 cms in length. Michael, who is a keen
fisherman, suggested that during the afternoon race we should tie a line to the
transom and catch our dinner while we were sailing. We decided that this was
not a good call, because fishing out of a boat is not allowed

The second race started at 3 p.m. with conditions even lighter than the morning
race. Again the course was shortened, with the results being similar to the
previous heat, with the exception of the Kruger Boys grabbing third position.
Again we had the trout jumping experience, with Michael already planning next
year's trip to arrive the day before, to fit in some fishing.

By the time we had reached shore and covered the boat up for the night, it was
only 5.30 p.m. with still two and a half hours of daylight left to fit in 9
holes of golf. With a quick ask around we had a fivesome. Michael and Brad had
played quite a bit, but Sam, Ian, and myself had limited experience.

Off to the clubhouse we went to hire some sticks etc for the round but once
there we found there were no clubs for hire. We were fortunate the Members had
finished their afternoon competition round and a few were prepared to lend us
some sticks for a game. After paying our fees, buying 15 second hand balls,
borrowing a one wood, one two iron, two four irons, and having two bottles of
red in the kitty, we were ready to play. The aim was to finish 9 holes before
dark. After negotiating the first two holes, we had lost only one ball, found
three broken tees, drank one bottle of red, and were thinking 'how much better
can one day get?' By then we were standing on the 3rd tee, with the track
leading to the dam below us, looking out over the water, with the shore line
dotted with people fishing for trout. In front of us was the third fairway with
seven Kangaroos feeding on the grass. By the time we reached the 6th tee it was
dark and we had no balls, no tees and no red wine left, so off to dinner at the
local RSL club. After a great Chinese meal, it was back to the dam and the van
for the night.

The next morning we were woken by the sound of a light plane buzzing the
rigging area for about 20 minutes. While we were having breakfast in a caf√© in
downtown Oberon, the locals informed us that the weather before this
weekend had been 43 to 45C for the last three weeks with strong easterly
winds.

For the third race the breeze had swung around to the east and was 8 to 10
knots, blowing straight down the dam. Nick Stabback, who had only come for the
one day, had gone home, and Brian Robinson in 8628 had arrived.

The wind was oscillating through 30 degrees regularly which made for some
interesting racing. First home 8644 Porter/Page, second Robinson/Dunn, third
.Cronin/Brad, and fourth Kruger/Kruger.

By the finish of the race the weather had started to deteriorate. There was a
large storm coming in from the south west, with strong wind squalls. Once
ashore it was batten down the hatches. We had a quick steak sandwich and beer
for lunch and waited to see how the weather developed.

The wind had now increased to 20 to 25 knots with heavy rain expected. Our 505
group decided to pack up and return to Sydney before the track leading out of
the golf course became impassable. As we drove away I couldn't help thinking
that with a little more planning and an extra day, how good this trip could be
next year.

The entertainment did not stop at Fish River. Whilst driving over the Blue
Mountains on the way home, a VW crashed into the back of the boat. It came
through with just two little chips to the gel coat. The VW sustained major
damage.

It just shows how good these boats are.

Don't miss next year's event. It is such a great venue.

David Porter
