Ontario Championships
J-Town Sailing Club, Toronto
18-19 July 1998

The Ontario Championships was the essence of 505 sailing and of fun dinghy
sailing in general. The regatta was held at the St. James Town Sailing Club
(J-Town for short) - a community club whose members are NOT to own their own
boats. The club has a fleet of Albacores, and has recently purchased 505 7823,
with another one on the way soon. Members flipped a coin for the chance to race
the 505 - Marek Balinski lost the toss and his reward was to serve as RC chair.

We had 11 races sailed around permanent marks in two days (8 of them were
official), with full trapezing on Saturday and light but consistent winds on
Sunday. The results below do not reflect the performance of individual teams,
as Hugh Morrin mixed up standings by jumping into a different boat almost every
race, and most of the time winning that race no matter which boat he sailed in.
Hugh was awarded an honorary first-place prize, and one of the beautifully
crafted "Klinger" trophies, for showing us all that it's the racing and sailing
skills that are most important.

The regatta brought a couple of boats out of 15 years of retirement. Alastair
and John Martin brought us up to date with Nick Kouwen and Matt Cowan at
Connastoga (their boats are still hanging in the garage rafters), while Geoff
and Bonnie Fernie sailed on Sunday. The Fernies proved they still have what it
takes when they led the fleet to the first windward mark. A potential new boat
owner also came by. June and Tim Williams, dropped in from Waterloo to check
out the class (after finding details in the 505 web site) and were rewarded
with a sail.

This great regatta has generated a lot of new and renewed interest in 505
racing, which is sure to carry over to the next Ontario regatta, which is also
the U.S. Mid-West Championships, August 22-23 in Windsor.

Renka Gesing
