The Gim Hoebelman Regatta for 1995

Chicago Corinthian Yacht Club hosted the Gim Hoebelman Regatta (Aug 5-6), an
open regatta in which the Midwest 505 fleet was invited to participate. The
CCYC is the northern-most yacht club in Chicago proper, at the level of the
northern-most of three water cribs, a large brick 'castle' 2+ miles off shore,
that provides drinking water to the city. The club itself is at the entrance to
Montrose Park, a heavily-used park set adjacent to a nice little harbor built
in the '30s by the Works Progress Administration (WPA).  This regatta marked
the return of the prodigal sailor! Bill Beardslee came down off the mountain,
out of the temple, down the jetway or whatever, after five months of traveling
the world with Michelle, but before actually making San Francisco his home. It
was great to see the ol' fella, long hair and goatee, a relaxed attitude.

Racing took place on a 1.5 mile olympic circle just west of the crib. At one
point, even the crib became a mark of the course. All but one race were Gold
Cup triangles; the one exception was a simple trinagle, down-wind finish, in a
dying breeze. The 505s led off the racing with three other fleets following in
the starting sequence: Merit 25s, Rhodes 19s, and Lightnings. The sailing
conditions were dominated by two circumstances: the weather was a continuation
of the heat that the midwest has been experiencing since early July, and the
Air/Water Show was going on about two miles away. It's tough to concentrate on
light, shifty winds when C-141 Hercules, B-52s, the Thunderbirds and Blue
Angles are flying over at about 600 ft.

Seven boats showed up to race, but for one boat, racing was an unsuccessful
diversion. Mark Derry was on edge because Richard Gray was here from England;
Richard Gray was here from England because Mark was getting married the
following Saturday, and they were both distracted by the thought of the
bachelor party scheduled for the evening of 5 August...something about a
Brazilian stripper and 25 bottles of scotch. They raced the first race, but
swimming and a relaxing afternoon must have seemed more appropriate than
bashing one's head against light, fluky breezes. Of course, Sunday morning's
racing was right out!

In general, all of the races were quite similar. The winds were out of the
northeastern quadrant. Until the last race, a thermal breeze never quite
developed. Those did best who went east of the rhumb line to the northern mark
and slightly south of the rhumbline to the eastern mark. There were holes in
the wind everywhere, and there were subtle shifts of 15-20 degrees that clearly
made a difference for those who followed them. Ki Kaiser was the most astute in
using the wind, and he had admirable speed. Graham Alexander kept plugging
away, but he did not seem to have the speed of Kaiser. Dohan/Beardslee had the
typical Waterat speed most of the time, but they were not quite as error-free
as Kaiser and Alexander. After all, they hadn't had much practice lately.

The back half of the fleet kept mixing it up. All four of the boats spent some
time up with the leaders. Jim Colgrove had one great race, making his old
Parker perform quite well. At no time was any of the boats out of touch with
the rest. There was some real racing here. It was *crucial* to pay attention to
maximizing boat speed in displacement mode (the only mode we used for three of
four races), to following the wind, and to staying clear of bad air. Finally,
for the last race Sunday, a serious thermal developed and the crews were able
to stretch their legs. This was one pleasant race.

CCYC hosted us well. The race committee did a respectable job, given the tough
conditions. Food was good and cheap for each meal, and beers were $0.75. Can't
beat that! It is a rather interesting place to have a yacht club, right in the
middle of the city, across the street from soccer fields, softball fields...
the walk in front of the club where the hoist and dinghy access are located, is
the main bike/rollerblade way into the park. Traffic was quite heavy. After my
boat was packed up, I bolted out of the city. I had to make my way south along
Lake Shore Drive at 4:10 PM with the Air/Water Show ending at 4:10 PM on the
lake shore. As I drove past the beach, the first spectators were just getting
to their cars.

Dave Stetson
