The 1995 Midwest Championship/Sandusky Fall Open

by Dave Stetson

The Midwest 505 fleet had another gathering in Sandusky on 16 and 17 September
to partake of the hospitality of the Sandusky Sailing Club and to compete for
the hallowed Midwest Championship. Six boats managed to show up, but at least
two others were intending to come until the skippers of those boats learned at
very nearly the last minute that they would be single-handing. Ahh, such is
life.  It turned out that the racing took place on the last weekend of summer
here in Ohio, metereologically speaking. Racing started Saturday under sunny
skies and light, messy southerly breezes. In fact, all three races Saturday
were in light, messy southerly breezes. The first race on Sunday was in a
half-hearted SW, but the last race finished in a blustery W-N-W, with cold rain
to unrig by. This last race was around the course set for SW, but when the
leaders were 150 yards or so from the leeward mark the wind shifted as if
following orders, and the last windward-leeward-windward turned into screaming
two-sail reach-screaming two-sail reach-screaming two-sail reach. Nice stuff,
but positions were fixed at the leeward mark the first time around. (Don't
blame the committee for not altering course. The Sandusky regattas are intended
to be three-race series. They let us 5-ohs use their marks for extra races in
which we gave ourselves rabbit starts. The committee let us play while they
tended to other business.)

The committee-started races were on a standard Gold-Cup layout. In all races,
there were holes that could have been avoided, there was the typical power-boat
chop (except early Sunday morning; nyaa, nyaa, losers ;-}), yet there were
times that crew got to extend their legs. The first two reaches were sweaty
affairs, but the wind did seem to be a tad more stable as the day wore on. The
racing was tight among the first three boats. Each boat had the opportunity to
nip at the heels of the other two in every race of the series. Graham set the
pace early by having a good start and leading at each mark in the first race,
but both John and Ki were heel-nippers. In the remaining races, various boats
were first to the first windward mark, but superior boat speed (or a miraculous
wind sense) allowed John/Dave to filter to the front. Graham/Mark and Ki/John
were well matched in boat speed and shared 2's and 3's for 2-5. However, in
every race, John had to cover or lose one of them. He covered. Myself and Mike
Agrell were wannabe's. We sort of finished each race as the kid brother might
follow a big brother and his friends at the mall, right behind 'em but not
quite brave enough to be right up there. It wasn't for lack of trying. In two
of the five races, we were second to the windward mark, in one we were second
to the jibe mark, but I swear the wind is allergic to the light blue of my
hull, or something like that. At some point in every race, we watched a hole
settle in around us. We'd dig out as quickly as possible, but by then, our
heroes had moved on. Whine--whine...

Jim/Charlie and Phil/Susan hung in like bulldogs, but neither could muster the
boat speed of us front guys. I think a bit of frustration settled in,
particularly for Jim, because he had gone faster earlier in the year. After
hours of contemplation, I realize that the wind was weird. Some of the holes
were well disguised, and there were small but profound irregularities. For
example, in the last race, Mike and I were cruising along on port tack, well
ahead of everybody but Ki, who was at most two boat-lengths ahead of us.
John/Dave were three or four boat-lengths back but in clear air to leeward of
us. John/Dave were a hair faster than we were at the time, but usually we were
pointing maybe 5 degrees higher. A glance later, John/Dave would be going twice
our speed, but 20 degrees lower. On six different occasions during that tack (a
matter of three minutes), John/Dave were well tucked; no, they were five
boat-lengths ahead; no, we'll clear them if they tack; nope, they're gone. I
could go on. The point is, I think Jim and Phil were victims of these
conditions. Neither Phil nor Jim have the time in the boats that the others of
us do, so I suspect that they are not as used to this summer's breezes as the
rest of us are. [Sound like Kingston, folks? Well, we midwesterners have had it
all year (with one glorious exception: Hoover 1995), and we're *Tired* of it!]

But, as usual, we had a wonderful time getting together again. There is
certainly nothing else I'd rather be doing; well, almost nothing else.

News flash: true, I think. Mike Breton and family are moving to Chicago. More
hard-core 5-ohers in the Midwest! Condolences, East Coast...


