Howard Hamlin

After years of surfing and believing that sailboats were slow and boring,
Howard was given a ride in a 505, and discovered how wrong his earlier beliefs
were. Despite no prior sailing experience, Howard immediately decided that
racing 505s was for him, and he quickly became one of the best crews on the
West Coast. Howard then decided to build a better 505, and he built a set of
tooling and started building the very innovative Hamlin 505 (after Howard
stopped building boats, Waterat began building boats from the same tooling).
After several years of crewing for John Andron, and some narrow misses at the
505 World Championship, Howard started steering. He raced with Jay Glaser on
the wire for several years, with numerous top finishes. More recently, Howard
has been racing with Don Smith, Cam Lewis, and Mike Martin. Howard and Cam won
the heavy air pre-worlds event in '92 and were favorites to win the Worlds
until Cam was injured and forced out of the regatta. Howard and Mike Martin
narrowly missed winning the '94 European Championship, and the '95 North
American championship. Howard and Cam Lewis narrowly missed winning the 1996
International 505 World Championship in Townsville Australia. Later, Howard
and Mike won the 1996 5o5 North American Championship, the third time Howard
won the NAs. They were second at the 1997 NAs and 3rd at the 1997 World
Championship. After several years of boatbuilding - his Hamlin tooling is
still used to build the Waterat 505 - Howard decided not to be poor, and now
is in real estate.  Howard lives in the LA area, CA.

