[505-usa-east-coast] Canadian Open Championship Report

David Kirkpatrick
27 Jul 2023, 14:28 (20 hours ago)
to 505-usa-region-one, 505

Regatta report courtesy of Peter Scannell, emeritus chair of sailing
instruction studies at 505 University:

The 2023 Canadian Championships was held on July 22-23rd as part of the CORK
skiff week in Kingston, Ontario.



14 Canadian entries were joined by 5 visiting US boats, making a fine turnout
of 19 boats.  

Forecast was uncertain, with light winds expected for both days.



Saturday started out with about 10kts from the NW with large gusts and lulls
across the course.  For race 1, logic suggested going left to avoid the shadow
of the land, and for a while it worked, with Tom Kivney and Gordon Russell
looking like early leaders.  However it was the rabbit, Jeff Boyd and Martin
ten Hove who continued right and found a large right hander with pressure to
lead into the first mark.  



Downwind, there was a mix of wiring and sitting.  Peter Scannell and John
Dunlea elected to gybe-set and were rewarded with good pressure to allow them
to wire and gain about 8 places.  The remainder of the race was all about
finding the pressure, with lots of opportunities for big gains.  Jeff and
Martin held on for the win, with Tom/Gordon second and Peter/John crossing the
line in third. 



In Race 2, Scannell/Dunlea took control at the midway point and led the fleet
home ahead of John Ingalls and stand-in helm Alex Bowdler, with Dave
Kirkpatrick and Sol Marini in third and Jeff and Martin fourth.  At this point,
Scannell/Dunlea realized it would have paid to have read the sailing
instructions, when they realized they had failed to finish correctly for both
of the opening races.  Going back around, they managed to salvage a 7th by
refinishing race 2.         



Bowdler/Ingalls were starting to gel and won race 3 from Kirkpatrick/Marini
with Scannell/Dunlea in third.



Race 4 went to 2021 Canadian Champ Robert Bartlewski sailing with Andrew Gesing
who succeeded in sniffing out shifts and pressure to hold on to win over
Scannell/Dunlea with Shona Weldon and Michael Wonnacott in third.

 

Day 2â€™s forecast promised more wind with a typical SW Kingston breeze that
would build if the sun stayed out. 



Race 5 was light, with Scannell/Dunlea chasing Ingalls/Bowdler around the
course before stealing the lead on the last run to finish ahead by a
boatlength.  Bartlewski/Gesing were third with Kirkpatrick/Marini in fourth. 



Race 6 was in similar conditions with Scannell/Dunlea leading from the first
mark to the finish.  Behind them, 5 or 6 boats converged at the finish to all
cross the line within seconds of each other.  Ali Meller and Steve Lovshin
grabbed the second spot with Duane Delfosse and Mike Hull in third.



The legendary Kingston thermal finally started to build by Race 7 and
Kirkpatrick/Marini took the win in great wire-running conditions ahead of
Ingalls/Bowdler with Kivney/Russell in third.



Race 8 was a carbon-copy for 1st and 2nd places, with Delfosse/Hull grabbing
third place.

 

Overall, that left John Ingalls and newcomer Alex Bowdler in first place, one
point ahead of Dave Kirkpatrick and Sol Marini.  Peter Scannell and John Dunlea
salvaged third place overall by sailing the last race without a tiller
extension, having used up their discard with Saturdays finish-line antics.

 

Best placed Canadian boat was Jeff Boyd and Martin ten Hove in 4th place.   

Special thanks to the local Kingston fleet who housed many of the visitors.


