Duane Delfosse
2 Sept 2023, 00:44

505 East Coast Championship

Twenty-six 505s gathered in Little Compton RI to compete for the 2023 East
Coast Championship.  Sailed off beautiful Sakonnet Point, the venue is direct
ocean access with vistas and ocean rollers.   Participants travelled from as
far as Toronto, North Carolina and even California to participate with a strong
contingent of 10 teams travelling from Canada.

With three days planned for the event, the first day was unfortunately a blow
out with 25 to 30 knot winds and large seas.  Several teams went out to sail,
but the consensus was it was too much to race.  Day two brought light southeast
winds with large left over rollers and overlaid chop.  Ted Heubner and Aiden
Naughten started very strong with two bullets.  This was Aidenâ€™s first time
racing 505s!  Robert Bartlewski and Adam Gesing were a strong second with a
pair of thirds.  Craig Thompson and Adam Wolnikowski rounded out the top three
with 2, 5 and good speed.     

Consistency would prove to be important, and it was difficult to achieve with
the shifts and pressure variations.  Sunday brought a welcome, fresh northeast
breeze, shifty, but starting at least with full trapezing conditions.  Four
races were completed, the first three in wire run conditions the last in a bit
less.  Heubner and Naughten found racing in the middle of the pack much more
difficult than being out front, as did Bartlewski and Gesing.  Thompson and
Wolnikowski found their stride on Sunday scoring (18), 1, 4, 3, which when
added to a 2, 5 on Saturday, produced a net score of 15 taking over the lead
(with a throw out enabled).  Again, with consistency being the theme, Duane
Delfosse and Mike Hull scored (14), 5, 6, 2, which when added to a 5,6 from
Saturday, resulted in a score of 24 to take second.   Henry Amthor and Chris
Pfrang also came on strong showing an improving score line over two days of
(14), 9, 12, 4, 2, 4 to take third with 31. In all, 5 different teams won a
race.  Congratulations to Craig and Adam for an outstanding series, and a good
warmup for Worlds.  Huge thanks to John Ingalls for organizing the regatta, to
PRO Cushing Anderson and to the many other volunteers and especially the
housing hosts.  John placed 20+ people in homes in Little Compton, no small
feat.

