Carl Miller report
G. Macy Nelson
2022-10-24 15:54 (6 hours ago)

Twelve boats from three countries (USA, Bermuda, and Canada) sailed five
spectacular races in East Coast 15-20 and West Coast 12-16 knots. Whatever it
was, we were raked and wire ran all the time. We even had a little San
Francisco bump for the first few races when there was wind against tide. The
American boats came from Miami, New Hampshire, Rhode Island, Massachusetts, New
Jersey, Virginia, and Maryland. Art and Charlie are back in USA 9003 after a
few decades. A few local boats didn’t sail. That was their extreme loss. If all
the local boats sailed and if we had a few more people who could handle the
front, we would have had ~ 18 boats.

Mike/Duane, Keith/Dave, and Nate/Macy set the pace. Mike and Duane were solid
across the board. Keith and Dave went well up wind. They had bad luck down wind
and one unfortunate capsize that converted a first to a fifth. Nate and Macy
hung in up wind and went well down wind with the aid of some highly localized
puffs and favorable angle changes. That good luck pushed Nate and Macy into
first. Keith and Dave ended up third. Mike and Duane were second, two points
out of first.

A few boats had difficulty with the breeze and waves. It will be easier next
time and the time after that. Just sail your boat and ask questions.

Saturday was a beautiful warm and sunny day with absolutely no wind. No
worries. Ali supplied the coffee in the morning and Kelsey supplied the beer in
the afternoon. In between, we elected TJ O’Brien as the new Region 2
Coordinator and began discussing the schedule for next year, the FLA
Midwinters, and the Worlds in Santa Cruz.

We will sail at West River until it gets too cold. Then, everybody goes to
Clearwater the third week of January.

Thanks to West River for hosting the event. And thanks to everyone for coming.

-Macy Nelson
