Elvstrom Zellerbach 2022 - St. Francis Yacht Club - May 14-15, 2022

Last time I was asked to write one of these regatta reports it was all about
memory issues. This one is about excuses.

We all have them. Well...except maybe for the first place boat in any regatta.

In this case, after five ever increasingly windier races over two days out on
StFYC‘s picturesque, sunny, windy, and relatively warm racetrack, the team with
no need for excuses was MikeH and RobW. They had a pretty convincing
performance all-round; particularly in the windiest of races. Congratulations
guys! It was impressive sailing. That's assuming you actually went around all
the marks in both races on Sunday. Nobody I asked is actually sure as you were
often too far in front to confirm! But, assuming you did round them, great job
and thanks for all the input and advice you share all the time.
Congratulations! We’ll keep chasing!

That all said, I think most of the rest of us had some pretty solid excuses for
not beating Mike and Rob. 

Starting with the runners up…

Despite being one of the four boats within 3 points of each other after
Saturday’s three races Howie and Jeff had to settle for second. Their excuse
for not winning? It was gusting over 25knots in the last race on Sunday and not
much less than that in the race before. Despite that wind, they never placed
lower than 4th in any race! Whether Howie likes it or not, I’m giving them the
excuse that Howie is on the ++++ side of 65 and still kicking all our asses
(but one) in a really windy, tricky regatta. Sure, Jeff’s an OK crew but come
on, you’re a god and inspiration for all of us Howie! Great job you guys!

Tied for second but losing the breaker to Howie and Jeff were Mike and Caleb.
Actually they have a pretty legit excuse as they pulled their vang out of their
mast and missed the last race as a result (aren’t you an engineer Mike?).
Noted, however, is that even with the rest of their results being in the top
three and the plausible chance they may have gained a bullet instead of a
retirement in that last race, Mike and Rob still would have had them. You need
some more excuses Mike and Caleb! 😊

Fourth place went to Nick and Eric. Highly practiced, blazing fast, with a
combined age that’s less than a number of the weekend’s individual sailors, the
only excuse I can think of is the very tail end of puberty driven hormonal
imbalances or something. But seriously, you guys are going to be a force for a
long while in the class. Just don’t have any kids (see AJ and Blaine’s excuses
below!). Awesome sailors who are completely dedicated, methodical, detailed…and
with spectacular wipeouts downwind! That one you had while passing us will be
talked about for a while. 😉

In fifth was Mike Punnett and Don Smith. Another ageism oriented excuse here in
that their combined age is over 125 years!! I don’t even think there are
scotches that old are there? Despite this excuse, they were super fast and high
in all conditions - not so much when they were upside down mind you, but
upright they were blazing! Even with a number of aggressive weed checks they
still ended up in fifth and almost seemed to enjoy the capsizes…you could tell
by the way Don just lay on the ground after coming in - presumably reminiscing
the great times on…and in…the water.

In sixth place was Ted and Reeve. The only excuses I can think of for these
talented dudes is that they’ve spread themselves too thin. Ted must have been
distracted thinking about all the great skiing, mountain biking, flying, house
projects and who knows what else was on his mind. Reeve’s no better as he tries
to keep track of his own skiing, riding, kiting, and multiple 505 skippers he’s
keeping happy. Focus guys! Focus!

In seventh was Bruce and I, and we have all kinds of excuses. Holtie will say
it’s because I’m Canadian. Actually, there’s a few of you where that probably
first came to mind. My response to you all is, "Take off you hosers! All of
you!" One legit excuse is certainly having mud on the top of our mast. No idea
how it got there (ahem!) but it must have created quite a bit of drag for the
remainder of the racing. One more excuse. On the first day Aaron put a GoPro on
our ram. It didn’t come to us at the time as our vanity was peaked by the
opportunity to be famous in video but in hindsight it’s clear now that Aaron
put it there to weigh down our bow. That’s two excuses (three if you’re a hoser
counting the CDN factor!) Need I offer more?

Eighth went to Tim Murphy and, new to the 505 crew but still weighing no more
than a 470 crew, Josh Goldberg. As for excuses, a pretty good one is that their
combined weight was about 320lb (I’m guessing. Maybe Tim’s more solid than I
think). Beyond that it’s clear that Tim’s focus is predominantly on his kids
who managed first AND second in the 420 class. BTW, he’s looking to adopt a
third so that they can go after a Murphy family podium sweep at next year’s 420
worlds so if anyone has a talented teenager to sell, he’s buying. If the kid
complains or threatens to report you for it, tell them about Tim’s Porsche and
his new Ocean Rodeo A-Series kite gear that’s 40% lighter than dacron
air-framed kites and wings (please excuse the shameless plug and free
advertising by me!)!

Ok. Getting close and my flight home only has an hour to go. 

In ninth place was Ryan Nelson and Mike Bishop. These guys are really on the up
curve in their overall performance. They are continuously getting better,
faster, and are more consistently in the hunt all the time. So, for that reason
they don’t really need an excuse. That and also it was nothing but excuses from
Ryan when we were in Bellingham so I think he may have just exhausted himself
with the excuses there! Ha ha, kidding Ryan! Your boat problems there were real
- but you are a professional rigger after all so if anyone could have McGyver’d
them…. 🧐😉

Next was Ian O’Leary and Matt Merchant. Their excuses are easy to identify.
Matt will need to confirm but I’ll bet that Ian never, ever stopped talking
about how excited he is about his new boat and the fact that the worlds are in
his home town (or county at least) this summer. Ian’s buzz about this 505
season is highly infectious and likely causing issues with the seismic monitors
throughout the Bay Area. I doubt there was any conversation on the boat the
entire weekend that wasn’t about Ireland or the new boat. Matt was probably
suggesting tacks and Ian’s response was ‘YES! Yes! I’m going to tack all over
the place in Ireland! I’ll show you my tacks, my favourite pub, my summer home,
my sheep, my beloved fricken homeland!!  God I love this boat! What did you
say?!” 

Matt’s other excuse was he was day dreaming places to leave all his gear behind
at STFYC. 😉Hope you got it back Matt!

In eleventh we had AJ and Blaine. The race results for AJ and Blaine don't tell
the real story. The sixth place they had in the 2nd race of day one is much
more indicative of where they were at multiple times throughout the event but
alas, here come the excuses. Both of their excuses are that they have kids -
lots of kids. Not just lots of kids, but very young, very active, boys! I
hereby submit that they will both be excused 100% for the next 6-7 years. By
that point, they’ll finally move closer to Tim Murphy’s excuses which are not
quite as solid but still acceptable. There will come a time when all five boys
combined will start to dominate the youth sailing scene themselves and AJ’s and
Blaine’s kid excuses will become more occasional…maybe. It depends whether the
kids go straight into 505s and the Conrad/Pedlow teams are then owning,
transporting and rigging 4 or 5 boats at each event instead of only two. BTW,
the reason Ted doesn’t have the same excuse as AJ (I’m presuming) is because
he’s kiting, biking, skiing or flying most of the time! 😜 One other excuse was
that AJ was driving a borrowed boat in the big breeze (fast and high the many
times we were chasing behind them). This was with purchase systems designed for
MikeM and Reeve who now owns the boat, not AJ. I think it’s even a skipper
hoist/douse boat, isn’t it? An impressive feat by any measure but especially in
those conditions. The new boat waiting for AJ in the UK should be a dream but
don’t worry AJ, you’ll still have that 'kids' excuse whenever needed for the
next 6-7 years! Use it!

And finally Aaron and Rob. It was great to see you two again after such a long
time. Rob it was awesome to see you out and enjoying the boats that we all love
again. We’ve all been through a lot the last few years but not like what I can
only imagine you’ve dealt with. I hope you don’t mind me bringing it up here
but I really feel that it’s something when one of the 505 family is thrown a
wrench and then gets back into the boat at the earliest opportunity. There are
others who’ve done so in similar ways too. This fortitude that you and others
have exhibited is a testament to the class, the fleet, you and Aaron as a team,
the friendships we all share. A heartfelt "Welcome back Rob!". Here’s to a
continued strong recovery. Looking forward to seeing it on display in both SC
in June and especially in Cork this summer!

Of course Aaron’s excuse will be that the GoPro cameras he tried to weigh
everybody down with weren’t heavy enough!

It was a fun one. Good to see you all and hoping to see you all again soon!

Rich

Wed, 18 May 2022

Richard Mundell
