Chris Pittack <chrispit77@gmail.com>
20 Oct 2022, 22:57 (21 hours ago)
to 505-usa-west-coast, Bellingham

Stuart Sinclair Regatta Report
Written by Prof. Paul Pihl

As the shadows lengthen and a chill returns in the evenings and in our
local waters, it’s only natural to reflect on the dog days of summer and
the great times that were passed on the water. For the local sailors who
weren’t able to make the trip to Ireland, no doubt the highlight of the
sailing season was the return of the Stuart Sinclair Regatta and the
official launch of the Penn Cove Yacht Club.


Penn Cove has the reputation of providing consistent champagne sailing
conditions on most warm summer afternoons - even when most other corners
of the Puget Sound are calm. For decades it was the preferred racetrack
for Whidbey Race Week and the site of some legendary summer sailing.
    However, racers have typically sailed out of Oak Harbor. For small
    boats like 505’s that meant a long slog in light and shifty
    conditions to get to the good breeze in the cove. Often it was an
    hour sail out and back again.


A few years ago a couple of dear and dedicated members of the PNW 505
fleet purchased a small beach house just east of Coupeville. It was
a major fixer-upper but it was right on the beach and they set about
restoring their new acquisition. Rumors began to spread among the 5-oh
fleet of a beach launch in the heart of Penn Cove with extraordinary
potential. There were claims of pulling up sails in complete calm,
rolling boats to the waters edge in 5 knots and sailing a few boat
lengths out into a reliable 10-15. Others regaled us with tales of wire
runs in flat water and ultra steady breeze.  It was a supposed oasis
from the inland summer heat. A nirvana with ample space to rig 5, 10,
maybe 15 boats… possible camping on an adjacent undeveloped lot… So,
when the Stuart Sinclair regatta was put back on the calendar and the
site was listed as “PCYC” it seemed like this would be the ‘bush
regatta’ we had all had been longing for.

 

Several teams arrived on Friday to set up and avoid the boat rigging
traffic Saturday morning. Those who set up camp early enjoyed the
stunning scenery and after twilight witnessed dozens of shooting stars
lined up single file streaking across the sky. It was an auspicious sign
for the return of Stuart Sinclair Regatta and a not so subtle reminder
    that Elon Musk has bigger plans than becoming master of the EV
    universe.


It was originally anticipated that maybe a half a dozen boats would
attend. To everyone’s surprise and eventual delight over a dozen teams
attended. Many familiar faces that had not been seen since before the
pandemic made the trip. Long time PNW 505 sailor Craig McMinn was the
PRO. The legendary Cynthia and Charles came down from Canada. Brian
Trainor, who hadn’t been seen in years, also came down from the north
with his family and raced with his now 505-sized son Brendan. The rest
of the fleet was formed by regular and semi-regular 505 sailors from
near and far and all around the Puget Sound area. However the award for
traveling was no doubt the Commonwealth team-up of Patrick McGale from
England and Chris Pearson from Australia. The regatta was off to a great
start before any sails were raised.


On Saturday racing occurred in a building breeze. The first race was
held in about 6-8 knots, but the wind strength and quality increased
throughout the day requiring wiring on most upwind legs. Downwind legs
were mostly sit running, although some lighter teams were able to make
wiring an option, especially later in the day. Racing was tight and each
race of day one had a different team finishing first. Mats and Paul were
able to get a good lane on the first beat and were also able to spot the
small windward mark and get to the layline first. We all discovered that
locating the windward mark would be a significant challenge. There was
a bit of anxiety for leaders as they searched for the mark! Since PCYC
is a new operation and this was the inaugural regatta, marks were
improvised and there were challenges setting in the deep bay,
establishing a course, and keeping the mark within sight. Despite the
challenges, the RC did an admirable job of getting off fair races.


In race 2 Chris and Anne applied their local knowledge and keen eyesight
to sail into the lead and complete a perfect race. The ever quick and
light team of Piper and Dan took race 3. It was no surprise that Pierre
and Courtney found a high fast lane on race four because that’s what
they always do. However, it was a surprise to see Pierre crewing!
There’s no doubt the Frenchman knows both ends of the boat since
Courtney and Pierre were able to edge ahead of the fleet to take the
fourth and final race of day 1.  Miles Johanesson was another driver who
became the crew for the weekend. He and Jazi were always at the front of
the pack and although they didn’t get a bullet on day 1, they were
consistent and finished just three points behind the leaders on
Saturday.

 

After racing, the grill fest and community potlatch began. Orcas swam
through the race course and passed a stone's throw from the deck where
we were feasting. Sugar uncorked the Zaya, Mount Baker shone in all its
glory as sparks flew from the beach fire, followed by Elon’s light show
after sunset.


On Sunday morning the deck grills were fired up and Sugar and Alyce got
to work cooking up pancakes. It was a slow start to the wind but no one
seemed in a rush. Why not have another quinoa cake and a third cup of
joe?


Mid day the wind arrived and racing got started. The wind seemed better
on the south side of the cove so the RC set up there. Moorage balls
along the beach were utilized for leeward marks and as part of the start
line. Moving the course also made for some great spectating. Families
enjoying the summer weekend at their own getaways gathered along the
beach to watch and cheer as the boats close tacked along the shore and
clapped at the roundings and finishes. 


There were lots of close battles and finishes on Sunday. Mats and Paul
traded bullets with Miles and Jazi. Courtney and Pierre were always in
the top pack. Cynthia and Charles were consistently fast and scored two
seconds. The quality of racing in the fleet has improved tremendously
over the last few years. A slow tack, jibe, or rounding often results in
an exchange of places. The fleet is getting faster, there’s tight racing
throughout the fleet and we’re all literally having a boatload of fun. 

It is more than fitting that the Stuart Sinclair Memorial Regatta ended
up at PCYC. The event has moved around over the last decade. For several
years it was hosted by the Port Townsend Fleet. They hosted fantastic
regattas and welcomed sailors into their homes, just as Stuart had done
on many occasions. The event was hosted by the Bellingham fleet during
the pandemic and they did their best to welcome brothers and sisters
from around the PNW too. Many long time PNW 505 sailors fondly remember
the events that Stuart organized in Astoria and also a fantastic bush
regatta at Cathlamet where the whole fleet camped together on the shores
of the Columbia River. All who knew Stuart have abundant memories of
great times centered around an open and welcoming 505 community. This
past summer the stars (and satellites) aligned and Stuart’s event was
back on the calendar in all its glory. PCYC was a spectacular host and
gave all those who attended many more memories of great sailing,
friendship and fun that will keep us looking forward to the next time we
can get together again. Long live PCYC! Long live the memories of the
great Stuart Sinclair!
