Zimbabwe 505 National Championships
by Kevin O'Conner

Back from a successful and very tiring Nationals at Kyle. We had ten 5o's,
three from South Africa and the rest locals. The format of the Nationals has
changed in keeping with pressure to keep abreast of world trends. We thus had
scheduled 12 races of which 6 were to be short races. In the event we only
sailed 11 races, 6 short and 5 long. The short races consisted of a 6 minute, 3
minute, go start sequence, a 1000 meter beat, 1 to port, a 1000 meter marginal
spinnaker reach, round 2 to Starboard, an 800 meter beat to number 3 to Port
and a 1000 meter run to the finish. From the finish straight back to the start
where, once the whole class had arrived the next start sequence for that
particular class was commenced. On some occasions if you went slow on the one
short race you would only just get back to the start area with 3 minutes to go
to the next start.

It worked really well. The 5o's managed to get in 3 races to everybody elses 2
on the first day and all in under 2.5 hours. Finishing on a run was a novel
experience.

Jeremy was so chuffed about Margies Magic beating Nigel that he is wildly
promising to make another 3 for only $15000.00 Zim. Very exciting. In fact The
first 5 places were very close up until the last 2 races: Nigel first, Margies
Magic second, and then Margies Magic first and Nigel second. We frequently had
boat speed on Nigel in a wide range of wind conditions. I had a bit of
difficulty because Robyn is a little light and the wind would go from 3 knots
to 18 or so and back again over a 3 minute period. Meant loads of changing the
rig, which you need to do more if your crew is light. Nevertheless we had great
fun and close racing. By the end of the 11th race I was glad to call it a day.
I feel it is possible for us to have 12 local boats at the next Nationals which
would be pretty exciting.

Notes from John Wyles:

Margi's Magic 7640 was built in Zimbabwe with a wood hull by Kevin's brother
Jeremy. The $ price quoted for new boats is in Zimbabwe Dollars, Zim$12 = US$1,
making a new hull around US$1,250! Nigel Milns boat is a 1995 epoxy Rondar.
Pink Panther 7627 was my old Parker, and Amethyst 5267 a Rondar which I
renovated in 1994 which is sailing with old 7627 sails. Absolutely 4th Street,
Sitatunga and Suggestion Box are all Zimbabwe home built boats, by Kevin. Lake
Kyle (Muturikwe) is a great place to sail when there is water. During the 4
years I was in Zim we were only able to sail there once due to recurring
drought, and with El Nino warming up I think they are in for another.


