Not one but two regatta reports.

Anyone who was watching the weather forecast leading up to the Santa
Cruz 505 event this last weekend, basically everyone who was going to
sail would have been very nervous. Cloudy, chance of rain, wind???
However, we need not have worried. On Friday 6 boats got out to practice
on the Friday in some decent breeze. Certainly, into the 20’s and had
a great sail. But would that be the end of the wind?

 

A great turnout of 15 boats, with several new teams and some unfamiliar
combos, took to the water Saturday to do battle on the Monterey Bay.
Despite overcast conditions (in Santa Cruz that generally means no wind)
and even the occasional spot of rain we were served with solid breeze
into the high teens giving great racing. The racetrack was pretty open
with shifts up and down giving passing lanes and opportunity for gains
and losses. To add to the fun we were joined on the starting line by
3 470’s. This made the starts very tricky and key to a good day. Showing
that practice and years of sailing together pays off, Howie and Jeff too
the first 2 races with ease before AJ and Rob took a win. The 4th race
of the day saw another team, Dougie and Keahi take a win. This was done
by executing a stunning Port tack start and getting out to the right
hand corner ASAP, which on a one lapper was key. 4 races, 3 winners and
lots of teams at the front. Pete and Mike in particular getting the hang
of their new boat.

 

Saturday night we had a table for 26 with almost everyone joining for
dinner, thanks all for coming, good food, better company!

 

Sunday again saw unusual conditions. The wind was southerly, slowly
going Westerly and between side tanks and trapping all day. Again the
racing was super close with lots of place changing and 3 races each of
2 laps were run by the top race team headed up by Don Ratcliffe. They
did a great job, fast turnaround, good courses and no drama!

AJ and Rob started fast, winning race 5. Dougie and Keahi followed a 2nd
in that race with a win in the 6th to move in to contention. Mike and
Dave’s 2nd, Howie’s 3rd while AJ and Rob scored a 6th meant that the
last race was a winner take all affair between 4 boats!

Originally the course 1 flag was flown, but this was dropped a minute
before the sequence started and replaced by course 2. In a very tight
race Howie and Jeff had the lead but instead of going back upwind,
headed to the finish. Jeff and Matt capitalized to take a win, showing
home tough the racing was, their previous finish was a 13th! Crossing
2nd was AJ and Rob, giving them a hard-fought win, Howie and Jeff clung
on to 2nd, 1 point ahead of Doug and Keahi and Mike and Dave. 2 points
separated 1 and 4!

New team Caleb and James ended strongly with 2 4th place finishes and in
total 7 boats had top 3 finishes in a race!

 

A great weekend of racing and catching up with friends old and new in
one of the great places to race 505’s.

 

Thanks all for coming.



What a fantastic 505 regatta 15 teams enjoyed last weekend in Santa
Cruz. Medium plus breeze on Saturday and light to medium on Sunday
provided a bit of everything, with pleasant but challenging conditions
and tactical battles throughout the fleet. Recently unseen stars Stuart
Park, Dave Shelton and Ryan Cox were back, and none have missed a beat.
Three very talented new fleet members joined us as well. James Golden
and Caleb Yoslov in their newly acquired beautiful yellow Fake Taxi, and
Lucy Wilmont, who is chartering the fleet loaner boat this season. Lucy
is sailing with Eric Anderson while his driver is out, and all three of
these young stars in the making will be pushing into the top of the
fleet in short order. Unfortunately, they barely drop the average age of
the fleet.

As for the racing, the top 4 boats were separated by 2 points after the
drop. Tying for first before the drop, and tying for third after the
drop, Dave Shelton and Mike Holt finished in fourth. Second before the
drop but finishing third, Keahi Ho and Doug Hagan won two races and had
their aloha spirit in top gear. Jeff Nelson and Howard Hamlin also won
two races, and claimed to have missed the course flag in the last race,
but just wanted to get a jump on the drive home. And also winning two
races, the wonder pairing of Rob Woelful and AJ Conrads took home the
gold. The two big smiles they normally wear grew three sizes when the
final results were posted. Well done!

Aaron Ross
