[505-usa-region-1] 2023 505 Midwinters


Following an outstanding 3 day practice/clinic put together by Ethan
Bixby, coached by Mike and Roy Ingham, and hosted by Clearwater
Community Sailing Club, the 2023 505 Midwinters started on Friday
January 20 with moderate winds under bright skies. Though not quite the
very big and very competitive 2022 Midwinters fleet, most of the usual
suspects were accounted for. 

Race 1 went off in flat water and northerly-ish marginal trapping
conditions, and to absolutely no one's surprise Ethan Bixby and Chris
Brady jumped out to an early lead and held it. Peter Scannell and Ted
Huebner (subbing in for John Dunlea who was at a combination falconry
exposition/ecstacy rave in St. Barts) found instant mojo and rolled in
for second, followed by Robert and Sabina Bartlewska. A pile of boats
followed them in in a clump.

Race 2 started with a touch more breeze, with Robert and Sabrina
performing rabbit duties. It was a very good race to be the rabbit as
a rightie rolled in, they took advantage and were never challenged for
an awesome race win. Peter and Ted sniffed out the rightie as well for
their second deuce. Australian/American combo Craig Cobbin and Matt
Merchant rolled in for third, with another large clump of boats just
behind. After two it was the Bartlewskis and Peter/Ted tied at 4 each.
Sabrina deserves special mention here - big skills and big smiles the
whole way through. Amazing sailing from the father/daughter team. 

The breeze bumped up a bit for race 3, which along with Clearwater's
weird tide cycle kicked up a super enjoyable not frustrating at all
steep chop. Kirkpatrick and Longson squeaked past Ethan/Chris and Barney
Harris/Paul von Grey at the top mark and were able to extend.
Scannell/Huebner and Harris/von Grey used some ninja-level speed and
shift calling to leapfrog into second on the second beat, pushing
Bixby/Brady back to fourth.

At the end of day 1, Scannell/Huebner and their brace of twos held the
lead with 6, with Bixby/Brady and the Bartlewskis tied on 12 points, and
Ingalls pere et fils tied with Kirkpatrick/Longson at 13. 

Cobbin/Merchant started blazing in Saturday morning's moderate easterly,
leading Kirkpatrick/Longson and the rest of the people they caused to
overstand the port layline into mark 1. A bit of leapfrog down the first
run put Bixby/Brady in the lead, followed closely by
Kirkpatrick/Longson. Keith and Dave found a special pointing gear to
shear off of Bixby/Brady, find a lane, and take the lead which they held
for their second win, with the Ingalls keeping the pressure on for
third. Scannell/Huebner stumbled slightly with a 7, with the
Bartlewskis also fading somewhat in the breezier conditions. 

Race 5.1 started light, with Team Ingalls leading Bixby/Brady,
Harris/von Grey, Kirkparick/Longson and Cobbin/Merchant onto the run. An
ill-timed gybe seemed fatal for the Ingalls while Macy Nelson/Nate
Barton snuck forward. As the top of the course glassed over and with no
provision for shortening course, the committee abandoned.

After a goodly wait bobbing around, what meteorological ace Nathaniel
Plant called a "sucker breeze" started building from the north, just in
time for the current to go against the breeze for some wonderful chop to
go on top of the groundswell. The breeze built well past any forecast
strength, putting teams into rake mode for the race 5 restart.
Bixby/Brady and Kirkpatrick/Longson used midline starts to pace each
other out to the left, with Bixby/Brady using basic layline competence
to lead Kirkpatrick/Longson - history's worst layline callers - around
the top with Scannell/Huebner, Ingalls, Harris/von Grey, Nelson/Barton,
and crowd favorite father/son duo Art and Johnny Gleason in tow.
Kirkpatrick/Longson found a few big waves to get inside of Bixby/Brady
at the gybe and led into the leeward mark. Scannell/Huebner had the jets
on the second beat to pass Bixby/Brady. At the finish it was
Kirkpatrick/Longson, Scannell/Huebner, Bixby/Brady, and the
ever-consistent Ingallses in 4th. 

Despite the day getting a bit long, the race committee held the fleet
out for another. The first beat was a near replay of the previous
race's, with Kirkpatrick/Longson on Bixby/Brady's transom at the top.
Once again, Kirkpatrick/Longson found some low road juju and led into
the douse. Nelson/Barton found the gears to stay close behind the
leading pair, with Team Ingalls leading Scannell/Huebner for 4th and
5th. A somewhat lopsided beat gave Kirkpatrick/Longson a reasonably
straightforward job to defend for their 4th straight race win, with
Bixby/Brady gaining a few points over Scannell/Huebner. 

Overnight, Kirkpatrick/Longson held a 3 point lead over Bixby/Brady,
with Scannell/Huebner a further point back in 3rd, with Ingalls and
Harris/von Grey rounding out the top 5. 

Sunday's forecast called for anywhere between medium and super nuking
conditions as a front came through. Unfortunately, the upper end came
through and at the time of the first race it was mid-20s and rising on
the course area and that was that. 

Thanks to Ethan for once again arranging everything, and Clearwater
Community Sailing Center for hosting. The regatta will likely move back
to its more usual February calendar slot next year, and with huge
support from all participants the pre-regatta clinic is likely to be
back as well.  

