1995 Eastern Canadian Championships

The 1995 Eastern Canadian Championship was hosted by the Lac St. Jean
fleet, in Quebec. Despite being far enough north to sometimes see the
Northern Lights, this was not called the Northern Canadian Championship!
Jeff and Florence Boyd of Kingston were 1st, Hugh Morrin/Steve Yates of
Alberta and Kingston were 2nd, and Kevin Shulz/Phil Barron of Ottawa
3rd. Renka and Adam Gesing were 4th, and Chuck Hansen/Penny Estabrook
were 5th.

The event had good winds, and the social events turned into a birthday
party for Penny, who turned fifty!



by Chris Gillies


------------------

1995 Eastern Canadian Championships
Saguenay Sailing Club
Shipshaw, Quebec
July 1 - 2, 1995.

Three hours into the eight-hour drive to Chicoutimi, and we are stuck in
traffic in downtown Montreal. We have left the sailing Mecca of Kingston
- big winds and water - to sit in a car all day and race on the
dammed-up 1 km wide Saguenay River. Why are we doing this? We move
another 30 meters and stop again.

When we get to Chicoutimi, we are immediately struck by the beauty of
the place. The sailing turns out to be fantastic, with good tactical
racing, and reasonably steady winds.

In the light winds the first day, Jeff and Florence have the downwind
speed, and despite getting close once in a while, first place is never
in doubt.

Day two presents us with 10-16 knot winds. Hugh put the gears into
overdrive and I occasionally pulled the right line and experienced the
sound of silence to windward. Jeff and Florence were never far behind,
however, and dropped the first race to us by two boat lengths, then took
the next by one boat length.

The Saguenay fleet could not have been more friendly or accommodating.
The yacht club was beautiful - it is great rigging a 505 with my
tootsies curling up in fresh 6Â² blades of grass.

We left with the memories of the beauty of this place, and the proud and
hospitable people who live here. (Pierre even kissed me!)

So why did we sit in rush hour traffic in Montreal? Because this is our
country and these are our friends.

by Stephen Yates
Kingston
