42nd Australian 505 Championships
Brighton & Seacliff Yacht Club, Seaclif (Adelaide) South Australia

by Dave Colliver


Dinghy sailing at its highest and most competitive level was fought out
on the waters off Brighton & Seacliff Yacht Club from the 6th to the
13th of January when the International 505 class competed to select the
42nd Australian Champion from the strong fleet of starters who travelled
to Adelaide from as far away as Perth, Townsville, Sydney and Lake
McQuarie.

And a hot fleet it was.

Former 18 ft Skiff Champion, Dave Porter from Sydney with his new epoxy
hull saw him as a prime contender for the title.

Surprise entry in the event and fresh from Europe where they recently
came third in the highly competitive 420 class World Championships were
the 'young Hot-Shots' from Perth, Nic Bryant and Sam Gill. With youth on
their side and hungry to display their talents this pair 'rattled a few
shackles' in the 505 fleet.

Local legend Sandy Higgins would probably have been the best bet for the
series. Twice runner up in the event, Sandy chartered last year's
National Champion boat and with Simon Gorman sailing as for'd hand,
competing for his third title in a row as a crew having won last year's
title with Hugh Stodard and 1998 with Adrian Finglass, was the boat to
beat and attracted the 'pole position' as most likely winner ( no
pressure for Sandy & Simon )

As a living testament that dinghy sailing keeps you young, John Bagshaw
who won the inaugural Australian 505 Championship in 1958 competed in
the event he won 42 years earlier. After some years as Chairman of
General Motors Australia, now retired and at 74 years young and not
looking a day over 60, John Bagshaw epitomises what dinghy sailing is
all about.

HEAT #1

The start of heat 1 saw the predicted Sou Sou Easters however wind
strengths were down around the 12 to 15 knots with a reduced prospect of
the sea breeze taking hold.

Fickle wind shifts were there to be exploited with most of the fleet
leaders taking advantage of this and making a path up the centre. Many
found early on the disadvantages of following a knock too far and even
more what happens when you find a hole.

Big wind shifts around the top mark the first time saw the fleet spread
over more than a leg, Tenth place and back received a further setback
having to drop spinakers and fight for patches of wind.

Although no clear lead pack had formed on the second work, a comfortable
time barrier was held by the first 5 boats approaching the run. Again
there was no clear left or right bias and many loose covers were applied
at the top of the fleet.

Those who stayed right on the downwind leg appeared to hold a channel of
breeze early on but dropping wind strength toward the bottom mark
brought most of them back to the fleet. The lead boat maintained the
solid 100m buffer won on the first work.

The breeze had filled in slightly to the right of the course by the
third work with the hesitant sea breeze holding station just 500m to the
west.

With wind strengths increasing to 17 to 20 knots the head of the fleet
stretched its legs with the first boat holding a 200m lead over 2nd and
3rd with a further 200m back to 4th and 5th and another 200m to the
chasers at the wing mark for the last time.

Most of the fleet continued to work the centre of the course on the beat
to the finish, perhaps more as a tactical safety measure than in the
search for breeze and shifts. The lead boat was forced to fight hard
( to no avail ) to protect his position after second place Sandy Higgins
made a 100m gain on the last reach. Sandy, second for most of the race,
managed to overhaul Phil Gray within sight of the finish.

HEAT #4

A series of contrasts will always produce a champion who displays best
the ability, finesse and concentration required to squeeze to most out
of their equipment and competition. It looks like we're in for a show.

With Southerly winds under 5 knots containing subtle shifts at the
beginning of heat 4, the boats who lost valuable places in the lighter
conditions of heat 3 were no doubt hoping for a sea breeze to fill in or
looking for that gamble that could determine if they sink or swim.

Most went left from the start with the possibility of less tide while an
adventurous handful took a large dig to sea looking for more breeze and
a possible lift to the mark if winds swung West. Some gains were made.

Australia has made a great start in the first one day cricket match with
2 early wickets and restricting the Pakistan team to less than 2 runs
per over. Just an example of why this reporter doesn't do well in such
conditions.

Some new boat numbers established an early lead with local favourite
Sandy Higgins just inside the top 10. Another local light wind
specialist, Dave Colebatch looked like consolidating his heat 3 result
with another good showing early on.

A combination of tactics and technique saw only a few changes in
position by the bottom mark the first time.

Most of the fleet took a substantial dig to sea on the second work
while a few from the lead pack were more adventurous and found some
wind and point advantages early with a Westerly swing that stayed.

Some significant position changes were evident by the top mark the
second time. The whole fleet kept to sea for the run as holes began
to emerge inshore. This also gave the greatest tide advantage but
kept positions relatively unchanged. Nonetheless the two lead boats
held a 100m advantage over third by the bottom mark.

Again the leaders went well to see, tacking back as pressure was
applied by the chasers who tacked left. The two clear leaders gained
further as the wind swung further West however Sandy gained several
places going right and captured third with Dave Colebatch jumping to
fourth.

Wind strengths increased slightly along the last reach spreading the
fleet and overall keeping positions as they were at the top mark.
The dance of the third work was repeated in the fourth. This time
however Sandy seemed to find a hole allowing Dave Colebatch to sneak
in with a chance of third that was contested within metres right to
the line.

Heat #5

Early morning 10 knot Northerlies with a forecast of a neutralising sea
breeze may have concerned some who have not been performing in the light
stuff but by the start of heat 5 even worse fears were confirmed.

The patchy 4 knot Southerly that had crept in clearly favoured the left
which also had the greatest tide advantage in the series so far. The
outcome was quite staggering with 25th, 28th and 36 place overall in the
top ten around the first mark. The hole to the right had many victims.

Peter Hewson in Salt Water Wine maintained a 100m plus advantage all the
way to the leeward mark with Sandy Higgins, Binks Yacht Fittings jumping
from 7th to 5th on the first reach and to 4th by the bottom mark the
first time. There was considerable jostling in the other top ten places.

As the breeze swung further South and filled in somewhat Hewson went
right, Sandy tacking toward the centre after a slightly shorter dig to
sea giving him a small lead heading to the top mark for the second time.
Second place overall, Carter Jackson who has performed commendably with
two 1st places in the last two light heats jumped from 8th to 4th over
the leg.

Some caution was required throughout the run to stay within the main
channel of breeze forcing some to jibe twice. Positions at the sharp end
of the fleet however were unchanged by the bottom mark the second time
around.

Again the leaders took a dig to sea to avoid a nasty looking smooth
patch to the left of the course. Some good loose and tight covers were
applied to protect valuable positions as the fleet tacked up the centre
right.

While the two leaders split tacks at the half way point there appeared
to be no victor and the dance recommenced. Sandy made the best of the
lightening conditions and despite misjudging the lay line ( perhaps due
to tide ) maintained his lead around the mark. The combination of
incoming tide and lighter winds made the mark rounding a challenge for
the chasers, widening the gap back to 4th place Carter Jackson.

First to tenth was now spread over the entire second last reach in the
light but stabilising winds with many of the unexpected early leaders
holding on to good positions. Local light weather chess master Dave
Colebatch was making a late charge into 7th at the jibe mark but was
running out of time. Grant McGowan held a redeeming 12th in non favoured
conditions but would later slip back on the last work.

Sandy maintained a good loose cover over second place Steve Edwards up
the centre of the last work with Carter Jackson starting the leg still
in fourth. Steve Edwards and Richard Kleish ( 25th overall coming into
the race ) were holding their excellent second place with some pressure
from Peter Hewson and Bob Fennell ( 9th overall ).

Overall Placing Summary

After the 5th race and the worst heat dropped the top 3 positions remain
unchanged with the biggest jump being Dave Colebatch and Pip Pearson
from 15th to 4th after dropping their retirement from a broken goose
neck in the windy first heat.

As a day of many upsets, quite a few of the top ten overall place
holders dropped results from race 5 as their worst heat in the series so
far.

Early 2nd place holders from the first two heats, Phil Gray and Richard
Machin have not been able to maintain any ascendancy in the lighter
conditions and have dropped to 7th overall.

Sentimental favourite John Bagshaw is ever consistent in all conditions
and holds equal 27th position.

With two heats left to complete the series and forecasts for more light
conditions, 1st and 2nd places are both comfortably held while 4th
through 10th are separated by less than 15 points. This may particularly
concern the two NSW boats Two Minute Noodles Tour and Mitchell Sails
( 3rd & 5th respectively ) and QLDs Phil Gray ( 7th ) who have not
faired well in the lighter conditions.

While some further down the fleet made some big position changes as
a result of excellent results in heat 5, they are not likely to affect
the top ten placings.

Special Mentions from Heat 5
2nd place - Steve Edwards & Richard Kleish ( moved from 25th to 17th )
8th place - Marcos Vivian & Brendon Brittliffe ( moved from 36th to 29th
)
9th place - Sam Cronin & Brett Averay ( moved from 28th to 23rd )


Heat #6

Again with a forecast of Northerlies (which reached 15 knots in the
morning) and an afternoon sea breeze, many competitors would have been
expecting similar conditions to yesterday. The 38 degree (Celsius)
maximum temperature however had other plans for the day.

Milling around before the start of heat 6 where Sandy Higgins could wrap
up the series with a top ten placing, the breeze had stayed North with
big holes left and right and an ominous glassy horizon.

If a sea breeze was to over power the morning conditions it may result
in a 150 degree wind shift in the space of 10 minutes or less but being
there ready meant the risk of being becalmed in the meantime. If you
ever wanted to be on a race committee, this was probably not what you
were hoping for.

After a short postponement to be more certain the wind would hold
direction, at least for a while, Heat 6 started under light Nor'
Westerly conditions. While the fleet spread left and right the pace
setters followed shifts up the centre being ever aware of holes and
nasty short headers that led nowhere. It seemed it would be a day where
maximum speed through tacks would prove victorious.

A break away group of seven boats went left looking for a Westerly swing
with the influence of a possible sea breeze but most found themselves
headed before the entire fleet received the new wind (lighter but a good
shift) and were consequently crossed. Peter Hewson & Marcos Vivian (the
no longer surprise front runners from Heat 5) however gained
significantly and rounded ahead of the main fleet.

No clear gap had been won however and the first ten boats were separated
by only 100m in the light winds with Peter Hewson 1st, Marcos Vivian
2nd, Rob Napier 3rd, Dave Porter in 4th and Sandy Higgins who went just
right of centre in 9th.

The fleet spread slightly over the first reach with the noticeable
position changes being Sandy Higgins (up to 7th) and Dave Colebatch (up
to 6th). A perfect jibe saw Dave Porter challenge for 3rd but not get it
by the leeward mark.

Rounding the bottom mark the fleet were confronted with a windless
course width hole that seemed impenetrable. Those who went furthest
right found its narrowest point and gained a jump on the rest of the
fleet - a clear turning point in the race. Once clear, the leaders
tacked broadly up the centre as the wind oscillated from West to North
West with no side of the course appearing to be clearly favoured.

The second half of the fleet were left with nowhere to go as the hole
stationed itself over the leeward mark and parked - everything. But as
they rounded the bottom mark they held spinnakers in a local Sou' Sou'
Easter until reaching the Westerly pattern which then swung South taking
them straight to the mark. The leaders held a tightening starboard reach
to the bottom mark. (Keeping up - what was that about wanting to be on
a race committee).

As they rounded the bottom mark for the second time after the run Hewson
had dropped back to 7th, Dave Porter had moved to 2nd and Sandy 3rd with
Marcos Vivian holding 1st (36th going into Heat 5).

Now that winds had swung South the race committee gave a new direction
to the top mark - at 60 degrees to port. Despite the change, left paid
further dividends with Marcos Vivian stretching his lead over Porter in
2nd to 200m plus, Sandy 3rd.

As the wind swung South South East locally at the half way point of the
second last reach the fleet were headed, dropping kites and some having
to tack to the NEW wing mark - are we having fun yet? Porter was
catching.

Around the bottom mark for the last time Marcos Vivian held a 50m lead
over Dave Porter with a further 250m back to Sandy Higgins in 3rd. The
breeze had consolidated South South West after a dip to the South East
and strengthened to 12 to 15 knots allowing Vivian the opportunity to
protect his lead with a stable loose cover.

He did, but not without considerable pressure from Porter. Despite some
crash tacks from Porter in a close encounter within 300m of the line
Vivian refused to engage and split tacks right. The damage had already
been done and Marcos Vivian held on to win by a little over 10 seconds.

Sandy Higgins held on to a solid 3rd place to seal up the series subject
to official notice.

Coverage of today's two hour race will be available in paperback - early
March. Look for it at all good book stores.

HEAT #7 (FINAL)

The 9.30 am start for Heat 7 not only kept the competitors out of the
forecast 39 degree (Celsius) maximum temperature but provided the
greatest chance of good breezes.  The race began in 10 - 15 knot
Northerlies with streaks of 17 - 22 knots crossing the course. The
patchy conditions would seem to favour and early jump in the final gate
start however favoured inshore breezes to the right saw the Pathfinder
cross the fleet. Most of those who went left and tacked back to
consolidate at 2/3 leg distance they found themselves chasing.

An unfortunate early retirement saw one crew with a dislocated shoulder
but is now doing fine after inspection at the club by local GPs and
a short trip to nearby Flinders Medical Centre.

Only 2 or 3 boats found conditions to their liking to the far left of
the course and rounded in good positions. Some early series pace setters
found themselves back at the top of the fleet in the stronger winds with
Phil Gray rounding 1st, Dave Colebatch 2nd, Damien Carey 3rd, Dave
Porter 4th, Alan Bessell 5th and Sandy in 6th.

Significant changes followed on the superb reaches with Sandy leap
frogging to 2nd and Alan Bessell to 4th. Many tight luffing duels from
10th through 20th saw more position changes.

Almost the entire fleet went right on the second work with Grant McGowan
15th putting the Phil Factor to good use by finding the pressure to the
centre left with only a handful of others making good gains. Sandy Had
overhauled Phil Gray by 3/4 leg distance and rounded the top mark for
the second time in 1st, Phil Gray 2nd and Dave Colebatch 3rd.

Gray went seemingly too high on the run holding good wind pressure while
Grant McGowan was the only lead boat to go left looking for the inshore
advantage. Gray's gamble made gains of 200m putting him firmly back at
the lead of the fleet, planing all the way, while McGowan's netted him
seven more places. Some mishaps were evident further back in the fleet.

The third work followed the shifts early on, looking for wind strength
as well as angle. Sandy went hard left at 1/2 leg distance and found
even breeze most of the way to the lay line. Gray went to the centre
right but also found good wind strength, maintaining his lead to the top
mark for the third time. John Mitchell had worked solidly on Dave
Colebatch over two legs to capture 3rd. Two boats going left found
slight gains in the dropping breeze.

The second last reach tightened forcing many to drop or not carry
spinnakers outside the top 5 places creating some overtaking
opportunities. The resulting broad last reach saw several challenges but
no significant position changes. Many opted to point above the mark and
jibe as the wind swung further west.

The West Nor' Westerly held immediately around the bottom mark for the
last time, pointing the fleet directly at the finish line, but swung in
patches and continued to drop in strength further up the work.

Removing some tactical options this made for a tense final work where
concentration was paramount. As a result of earlier conditions, many in
the top ten were heavy weather specialists fighting for positions in
light air.

First to fourth were evenly spread as they had stood for several legs.
While Sandy made some inroads on Gray, Gray applied a loose cover closer
to the mark to protect his lead and take a comfortable win, Sandy 2nd
John Mitchell 3rd and Dave Colebatch 4th.

5th to 10th were tightly bunched with disturbed air possible with every
slight shift. Some frustrated tacks in fluky shifts closer to the line
spread the bunch slightly and gave some late position changes. Several
of these position changes may have in fact been for overall top
5 placings in the series.

Top Places

The top four places overall were unaffected by the results from heat
7 with Sandy finishing on an impressive 11.7, dropping a 3rd as his
worst result. Only 3.7 points separated 2nd to 4th. Carter Jackson and
Will McDonalds' 12th in the final heat was just good enough to retain
2nd place overall.  Brett van Munster and Adam Linton missed out on 2nd
place overall by 2 positions, requiring a 5th in the last heat, Dave
Porter missing 3rd overall by 1 place in the final heat, needing to beat
Brett van Munster.

Phil Gray and Richard Machins' tactical gamble on the run that gained
them 200m and put them into a 'comfortable' first place also jumped them
up the leader board overall to 5th from 7th. Phil had held 2nd place
overall after the first 3 heats showing a preference for stronger winds.

Dave Colebatch and Pip Pearson were 1 position too far back in 4th and
lost 5th to Phil by 0.4 of a point while Peter Hewson and Bob Fennell
dropped back to 7th overall.

Isaac Noble and Luke White displaced locals Ian Burford and Nick Manhood
from 10th place overall with a 13th in the final heat, beating Burford's
17th.


Closing Comments

Congratulations go to all competitors and Race Committee members for
a good, fair and clean series that provided varied and sometimes
challenging conditions and clearly produced an appropriate winner.  All
races were completed with four separate heat winners and no protests
lodged. Only two incidents caused major problems with a shortened boat
in the Invitation race and a dislocated shoulder in the final heat. The
crew member with the dislocated shoulder is doing fine.

Congratulations go to Sandy Higgins and Simon Gorman in "Binks Yacht
Fittings" for a convincing win (no doubt while using Binks yacht
fittings), proving consistent in all conditions and with a variety of
challengers.

