French National Championship, Hy√®res Bay, 12-15 July 2000
Jean-Baptiste Dupont reports:
Awful conditions for the French won by Ian Pinnell in winds over 30
knots at times.... and very lumpy sea state... Even Philippe Boite could
not cope with the conditions and finished second to Ian.... No need to
tell you that none of the French are in favour of a great kite after
such a windy championship.

Avec trois victoires et une place de sixieme, Ian Pinnell and Nick
Powell ont survole l'Open de France 2000 !

The French 5o5 National Championship was held over the 14 July long week
end in the great Hyeres bay surrounded West by the Presqu'ile de Giens,
the islands of Porquerolles and Port Cros to the South and le Fort de
Bregancon on the East where Jacques Chirac spends his hollidays every
summer. The championship was hosted for the first time by the Yacht Club
de La Londe les Maures in a very convincing manner with great roses and
beautiful dancers.

But what will remain in memories will be the very challenging wind and
sea state conditions. The Mistral was blowing consistently over 20 knots
but for one race and the sea was very lumpy giving very challenging
spinnaker runs. In those difficult conditions the British champions
demonstrated a second to none performance winning 3 races out of 4. They
miss the second race only failing to get a 180 degree wind shift which
brought to the line the peloton leaving the leaders windless and
powerless. The French crew Philippe Boite and Jean Luc Muzellec finished
second overall after having finished second to Ian in most of the races.
In doing so they win their 16th French title since 1982 !!!

Given the challenging conditions only 10 teams out of the 30 were able
to finish the 4th and last raced race. And given the Mistral was blowing
consistently over 30 knots on the last day, races were cancelled on
Saturday, allowing participants to return home earlier than anticipated.

Ian and Nick are now aiming at winning the European before shipping the
boat to Durban to compete in the World 2000 in November. They will
certainly be a difficult team to beat this year given the very
impressive lead they were able to gain with their new improvements.
