Avec trois victoires et une place de sixieme, Ian Pinnell and Nick
Powell ont survole l'Open de France 2000 !

The French 5o5 National championship was held over the 14 July long
weekend in the great Hyeres bay surrounded on the West by the Presqu'ile
de Giens, the islands of Porquerolles and Port Cros to the South, and le
Fort de Bregancon to the East where Jacques Chirac spends his holidays
every summer. The championship was hosted for the first time by the
Yacht Club de La Londe les Maures in a very convincing manner with great
Roses and beautiful dancers. But what will remain in memories will be
the very challenging wind and sea state conditions. The Mistral was
blowing consistently over 20 knots but for one race and the sea was very
lumpy giving very challenging spinnaker runs. In those difficult
conditions the British champions demonstrated a second to none
performance winning 3 races out of 4. They only missed the second race
failing to get a 180 degree wind shift which brought to the line the
peloton leaving the leaders windless and powerless. The French crew
Philippe Boite and Jean Luc Muzellec finished second overall after
having finished second to Ian in most of the races. In doing so they won
their 16th French title since 1982!!!

Ian Pinnell and Nic Powell

Given the challenging conditions only 10 teams out of the 30 were able
to finish the 4th and last raced race. and Given the Mistral was blowing
consistently over 30 knots on the last day, races were cancelled on
Saturday, allowing participants to return home earlier than anticipated.

Ian and Nick are now aiming at winning the European before shipping the
boat to Durban to compete in the World 2000 in November. They will
certainly be a difficult team to beat this year given the very
impressive lead they were able to gain with their new improvements.

Jean-Baptiste Dupont


