1996 Australian Championships and Preworlds

Townsville, Queensland, Australia

The 505 Australian Championships and the 505 pre-worlds ended April 9th. The
Australian Championships consisted of six races over seven days, while the
pre-worlds were the last three races of the Australian Championships, the
7th-9th of April. There were 80 Australian 505s racing for the Australian
Championship (the 505 is the strongest high peformance dinghy in Australia),
and 98 505s racing for the pre-worlds.

This is shaping up to be the best 505 World Championship ever, with a terrific
venue, all 505 World Champions from the last ten years in attendence, and
competitors like Australian Gran Prix 18 circuit winner Chris Nicholson, other
18 sailors Darren Nicholson, Ian Murray (of Colour 7 and One Australia fame)
crewing for his wife Alex, also an 18 foot skiff sailor, and Matt Owen. The
British team includes reigning World Champions Jeremy Robinson and Bill
Masterman, Ian Barker, Daniel Cripps, Mark Upton-Brown, and Paul Towers. From
the United States, Cam Lewis (Pete Melvin was supposed to be racing, but
suffered a sailing injury just a few days before he was to depart), and many
other world class sailors. 106 505s, the maximum allowed at the World
Championship, are expected on the start line for the World Championship.

The Swedish team was the strongest in the pre-worlds, putting all four boats in
the top eight overall. The Swedes were unable to practice before the event at
home, as Sweden was frozen solid! However, most of the Swedish 505 sailors have
15-20 years of 505 experience. Four time world champion Krister Bergstrom, with
crew Martin Westerdahl, won the pre-worlds with two bullets and a 7th. Ebbe
Rosen/Olle Wenrup were 4th, with the other Swedish boats 7th and 8th overall.

The Townsville venue is incredible with warm water, 360 days of sunshine a
year, a reliable sea breeze, a short sail from the beach to the racing area,
great parties and social events, and of course trips to the Great Barrier Reef.
Each race was full trapezing at least part of the time, with planing upwind and
down.

The '92 and '94 World Champions Chris and Darren Nicholson - household names in
Australia - won the Australian-only Australian Championships, but faltered in
the lighter air of the last three races which were also scored as the
pre-worlds, dropping to 11th overall in the pre-worlds. They responded by
having a new mainsail more optimized for light air made for them, and acquiring
a gybing centerboard similar to what the Europeans and Americans use. The
Nicholson's hope this helps their light air speed for the World Championship
which starts on the 12th. Chris was very happy to be back in the 505 after
racing 18s and Tornados, "its nice to be able to tack on every shift and puff",
and "the same speed sensation as an 18 footer"

1981 and '82 505 World Champion crew Cam Lewis said "Its great to be back in
the 505 class; the depth is better and the gear is more hi-tech". About half
the fleet are using Technora, Kevlar or spectra sails. Prototype Ronstan cleats
are being tested by some of the Australians, many boats have substituted
spectra for flexible wire in running rigging, and many hulls are all or partly
carbon fiber and Kevlar. Different masts, centerboards and sails are popular in
the 18 countries were 505s are actively raced, and it is interesting to see how
different the boats can be despite all meeting the 505 class's tight class
rules. Despite the technological advances some boats over 16 years of age were
competitive in the Australian Championship and pre-worlds.

Results from the Australian Championship and the pre-worlds suggest that the
Australian boats are more optimized for the heavy airs prevalent elsewhere in
Australia, while the European and North American rigs are better rounded,
providing good speed in a wide range of conditions.

Most of the competitors are very enthusiastic about the venue and the racing so
far. Sweden's Ebbe Rosen said this, his 15th 505 World Championship Event, was
"probably the best yet".

The first race of the World Championship is April 12th, with one race a day for
seven days.

Submitted by Cam Lewis and Ali Meller
