mail4mikemartin – zdjęcie profilowe
mail4mikemartin<mail4mikemartin@gmail.com>
nieprzeczytany,
12 paź 2016, 05:01:10
do 505-usa-west-coast@googlegroups.com

Warning. Do not delete this email; you may be subpoenaed by the Justice Dept.

Last weekend (Oct 8-9), nine 505s gathered in Santa Cruz for the SCYC 505
regatta. Those that did not attend are ”Losers!” The conditions were perfect
for easing the West Coasters into some training in lighter air.  Saturday
served up 10 to 13 knots of breeze and the RC banged off 5 tight races, 3
two-lappers and 3 one-lappers. It was not the typical Santa Cruz, instead
shifts made different sides of the course payoff. Adam and Mike came out strong
winning three of the five races wth both Rob & Holty and Andy & Howie taking
race wins. Post-race, the usual Debrief took place. When asked what happened in
the two races that they did not win, Adam and Mike claimed that they were
“tired of winning”.  All contributed to the debrief, even Andy and Reeve who
were pounding fog cutters. Afterwards the gang headed out for a group pizza and
pasta dinner. All behaved well with no “locker room" talk.

Sunday conditions were even lighter, giving the West Coasters some practice in
both sitting and marginal trapping conditions.  Five races were scheduled,
however during race three, super thick fog rolled limiting visibility to less
than 100 yards.  Apparently the fog cutters from the previous night came in
handy for Andy and Reeve. They were the first ones to find the marks, and
subsequently finished first and second, respectively, in the final race of the
day. 

After the pounding that Holty took on Saturday, he was embarrassed to show up
on Sunday, so Evan Diola sailed his boat. It was great to see Mats Elf come
down, and welcome to newcomer Eric Anderson to the West Coast; Eric sailed with
West Coast old-timer, Bruce Edwards. Also it was great to see 505 rigger
extraordinaire Ryan Nelson sailing, and thanks to Rob Waterman for coming up
from So Cal for the event.
