2019 National Champions: Roger Gilbert and Ben McGrane

This year’s UK Championship was sailed out of the Royal Lymington Yacht Club in
Lymington, UK on 9-12 May 2019. Conditions varied greatly as did the direction
and strength of the wind. While the UK seems to always deliver a bit of rain,
this regatta was mostly sailed in brilliant sunny conditions. All races saw a
very substantial current effect with the race committee working hard to set
windward/leeward courses in very strong cross-current conditions. Special
thanks to an experienced race committee who managed to avoid our fleet bobbing
around waiting for wind while also capturing all of the planned 10 races!

Teams had a lot to manage on the water and everyone seemed to comment that it
was very challenging but very rewarding racing. We saw large wind shifts and
differing pressure throughout the course. Many runs would alternate between
wire running and sit running as the wind varied greatly. Puffy, streaky,
pulsing wind took it’s toll on even the best of sailors sometimes catapulting
them hundreds of yards into the lead before sending them backward into the
fleet.

Of the UK championships I have sailed I can say without a doubt that this was
the most competitive! Of the 26 boat fleet, four different boats managed to
capture at least one first place finish. At least eight boats finished with at
least one race in the top three. Three boats went into the final race with a
chance to win. Ultimately the top three finishers scored 19, 20, and 20 points
respectively. Congratulations to Roger Gilbert and Ben McGrane who sailed an
excellent regatta and finished on top! In second place were Dan Holman and Sam
Pascoe who managed to beat Mike Holt and Rob Woelfel in a tiebreaker.

Our thanks go to the team at Royal Lymington YC for their hospitality, race
organisation and facilities.

Report by Rob Woelfel, USA9072.
