The 1985 International 505 World Championship
Report by  John Labbett
This article
was first published in 505 Great Britain No 27, December 1985.

ENOSHIMA Olympic Yacht

Harbour, Fujisawa, Japan, were hosts for the Marina Del Rey Pacific and World
Championships held from 11-24 October. Enoshima is a small island in a large
bay some 35 miles south west of central Tokyo. Racing was held in open seas
about two to three miles south of the island, mainly in prevailing offshore
winds and with negligible current. The courses were Olympic
triangle-sausage-triangle-beat, with approximately two mile first beats and
broad 55 degree reaches. The dinghy park was, in fact, part of the yachting
complex built for the 1964 Olympics and provided more than adequate facilities
with launching off concrete hands into a sheltered marina. A total of 55
competiters attended, representing 13 countries of which the Australians and
the host Japanese were the largest fleets. The regatta was also privileged to
have Paul Elvstrom (now 57 years old) competing and the veteran Frenchman,
Marcel Buffet, who is now 63 years old.

Two races per day were scheduled for the Pacific Championship which was held
in different conditions. These varied from F2/3 in the first day to F4/5 with
big lumpy seas for the second day. The third day was cancelled due to high
winds and extreme seas and also to a marked reluctance on the part of
competitors to risk their boats and equipment just three days before the World
Championship. Racing was very close at the front of the fleet, with Gary
Bruniges/Greg Gardiner eventually beating Peter Hewson/Alyn Ovenden by just
one place in the final race over the series. Going into the fourth race they
has 1,2,6 and 1,4,4 respectively and although Hewson managed to beat Bruniges
by one place it was not enough. Bruniges became Pacific Champion with 11.0
points with Hewson runner-up and Dean Blatchford/Tom Woods (1984 World
Champions) third. Chris Lewis/Andy Gray showed good speed upwind when it was
blowing and finished 4th overall, with Peter Colclough/Harold Barnes 5th.
There were two Australians in the top 10 positions and an indicator for the
Worlds was beginning to emerge.

There was a gap in racing for three days for measuring, recovering from the
Pacifics party organised by the Club on Sunday night, rubber-necking (i.e.
sight seeing), boat tuning and relaxing. The World Championship began on
Thursday 17 October.


Race 1:  Held in F5/7 and very gusty. Ebbe Rosen was first at the windward
mark with Chris Lewis second but Rosen's kicking strap broke when he was clear
in the lead. Two Australians (Blatchford and Bruniges) swept into the lead on
the run by not gybing onto the lay line immediately and trapezing into the
leeward mark coming up from very low. The finishing order was Blatchford,
Bruniges and Jim Wondolleck (USA). There were many capsizes in a blustery day
which resulted in only just over half the fleet finishing.

Race 2:  Held in very shifting F3/5 with big holes in the wind. J.B. Braun
(USA) was first at the windward mark with Hewson second. Braun lost the lead
downwind but recovered it on the second beat and held on the run. On the third
beat, Blatchford and Bruniges got past and, after much tacking up the last
beat, it was so close at the finish that neither was sure of the results.
These were finalised at Blatchford 1st, Bruniges 2nd and Wondolleck 3rd.

Race 3: Light F2/3 and even more shifty. First round the windward mark,
jointly, were Blatchford and the Great Dane, Paul Elvstrom. Blatchford
proceeded to establish a clear lead while Elvstrom faded. On the last beat,
while Blatchford was staying close to Bruniges, who had pulled up to second,
Jim Wondolleck managed to snatch the lead on a shift. The finishing order was
Wondolleck, Bruniges and Blatchford.  It was interesting to note at the half
way stage that notwithstanding the variety of conditions, the same boats had
finished in the top three in every race so far.

Race 4: Force 3/4. A large header for the pathfinder during the opening of the
gate meant starting late paid off handsomely. Hewson (the rabbit) was first
round with Ms. Aiko Saito (Japan) second and Eric Lockeyear (Hong Kong) third.
Hewson built up a huge lead during the next round but this was worn away by
immaculate and fast sailing by other Australians. On the last triangle, Hewson
was overtaken by Terry Kyrwood who went on to win and also by the ever-present
Bruniges who finished second - for a change.

Race 5: Force 1/3 with many shifts. A large starboard lift as the gate opened
enabled Elvstrom, who was again first out of the gate, to be first at the
windward mark with Bruniges second and Colclough third, Colclough was first at
the end of the reaches, but Bruniges passed him on the second beat and held
this on the run. Colclough re-established the lead on the third beat but
Bruniges got past again on the last reach on the kite drop. Colclough got in
front again and after a close tacking and covering duel, held on to win his
first race. Elvstrom ended up third.

Bruniges' incredibly consistent sailing in a wide variety of sometimes
extremely difficult and frustrating conditions gave him the World Championship
title. He had managed 5 second places and had won the regatta with a day to
spare. At this stage, Blatchford had a good points lead for second place
overall with only Wondolleck as an outside threat, but there were about
6 boats who could make third overall.

Race 6: Light F1/2 getting up at the end to Force 3. Herve Wattine (France)
was first at the windward mark with Mrs. Keiko Nogami (Japan) round second.
Colclough was about 7th at the windward mark and sailed into the lead on the
first tight reach. The second beat was very close with Nogami round first, but
Colclough got past on the run and held on to finish first. Nogami was second
and Saito third.

Although Blatchford did not finish well, he confirmed second place overall
while Colclough moved up to third after winning the last two races.

I think all the competitors agreed that this was a well organised and fair
regatta which managed to hold all races to schedule. It was also held over
a wide range of wind and sea conditions viz. Force 1/7 and flat to very lumpy
seas - which meant it did not bias the results towards the 'one condition'
expert.

What was clear was that the Australians were dominating five boats in the top
eight positions - though it has to be said they sent the strongest team from
the outset. Their whole approach to fast 505 sailing is very different from
British or American methodology. In essence, they all use balsa-built Kyrwood
hulls with spinnaker chutes and back-tacked jibs. They have very simple
internal lay-outs with few 'strings', no shroud adjustments, no struts, light
and flexible (mainly) Goldspar 1.7mm masts set with full luff round (mainly)
Horizon/One Design sails, jib barber haulers which move out board and up
following the forward thwart and no gybing centreboards. The main rig
adjustment is the forestay led back to the helmsman - it is now no longer
necessary for the crew to dive under the foredeck to alter the rig!

In light wind conditions they have medium rig tension and as the wind
increases they simply let off the forestay progressively and move the barber
haulers outboard. This results in excessive rake (by UK standards), very loose
rigging and a lot of low down mast bend. The mast and sails work together to
produce very competitive upwind performance in a majority of wind conditions,
although it was noticeable that Peter Colclough won the last 2 races in
lighter wind strengths.

The shore side and, in particular, the social side were well organised by the
Japanese. The fleet was treated to three excellent parties (one with
a magnificent firework display especially put on for the 505s) and often
informal arrangements were made to meet in nearby restaurants. The camaraderie
and friendliness amongst the fleet was an outstanding feature of the regatta
- probably the best in recent years. In this spirit, Paul Elvstrom, who
finished twelth overall, was heard to comment that he did not feel his age was
a disadvantage merely that he had not practised enough!

