https://505.ca/2024-eastern-canadian-championships-report/

2024 Eastern Canadian Championships Report

Posted on August 14, 2024 by Content Elf

The 2024 Eastern Canadian Championships will be remembered for the high
wind sailing conditions. Racing was cancelled after one race on
Saturday, as the wind speed reached 30 knots. Three races weresailed on
Sunday in 15 to 23 knots of wind before the breeze built to the point
that the RC sent sailors in. Twenty teams, including 15 sailors under 25
years old, participated in the event hosted at Kingston Yacht Club on
August 10-11.


Ali Meller (who moved permanently to Kingston this year) sailing with
Kyber Lovshin won the event placing 1 st in 3 of the 4 races series. Two
USA teams place 2 nd and 3 rd , Duane Delfosse/Mike Hull in 2 ndand
Thomas Kivney/Gordon Russell in 3 rd .

During the awards ceremony, Ali told the story that when he started
sailing the 505 back in the 70’s he was mentored by John Moss (Shona
Moss-Lovshin’s father and Kyber’s grandfather) and now he was able to
win this event with the help of his grand-child.

The top youth sailor (Under 19 years old) was Sabina Bartlewska from
Toronto, racing with her father Robert. The top female skipper was
Debbie Ashby from Ottawa, who placed 5 th overall sailing with her
husband Dave Adams. The Storer brothers from Ottawa both U19 sailors
placed 13 th overall and 1 st youth team.


Jeff Boyd high light the effort and success of Shona Moss for the
recruitment of younger sailors in the class. Jeff said that he had never
been to a 505 regatta were parents ask him for advises.  The Canadian
Class would like to thank Jeff Boyd for the organization of the event,
Bill Visser the Race committee chair who did a fantastic job with his RC
team, the Kingston Yacht Club and its manager Tom Wilson for their
hospitality.

NB: Ali Meller (who is a Kingston Sail Loft (KSL) partner) was racing
with a prototype KSL 505 Spinnaker. The spinnaker is a full triradial
design with all panels arranged to line up warp threads with the loads
radiating out from the corners. Kyber reported that it was very easy to
fly.
